[00:00:00] Hello my friends. So today is the day after Christmas. I want to wish everyone a merry Christmas. Now this week of course was a very very quiet week. So today let's do our markets outlook for 2026. Now before we do that of course we have to revisit how our outlook did last year. Honestly not that great. But first let's start with equities. So last year when the S&P was trading about 6,000, I was thinking we would have a pretty negative year and gave a target of 5,500 and that was just totally totally wrong. Not just wrong in magnitude but in direction as well. Uh it looks like we are just a hair's width from 7,000. So that was really really bad. And looking at gold uh last year when gold was trading at 26,000 I thought we would have a very good year for gold. uh think thinking that it would be you know around 3,000 and man we did have a good year in gold but whoa way way way more than I ever expected gold is up 70% year

[00:01:04] to date at you know just 4500 so whereas that was directionally correct still the the the 3000 outlook target was very very uh understated and the last thing of course was rates uh last year we wereing being about 4.6 on the 10 year. I thought rates would come down to around 4%. It looks like rates are about 4.15, still above 4%, but directionally though, still in the right direction. So, um, overall not that great. I'd say at least two out of the three we did get the direction correct. So, uh, hopefully we'll do better this year. Remember, this is not any sort of advice. This is for entertainment purposes based on my best judgment with the information that I have as of today. Of course, many things change in the markets and I do uh change my view as facts change but I will never update my outlook. The changes I have on

[00:02:05] my market views are in my market view portfolio on my website which we'll talk about uh later on. But for this year though, let's start with what everyone cares about the most, the S&P 500. Now, when I look at the chart of the S&P 500, honestly, it looks like we've been basically stuck here for some time. It it even looks a little bit toppy. So, you know, I'm my best guess is that we will get above 7,000 maybe maybe um next week. But next year though, so on the one hand, it's clear to me that policy is shifting in a pretty big way. So you have President Trump who is adamant adamant that he wants low interest rates. And so whatever the market is pricing in next year, I'm guessing that it's going to be a little bit lower and again that's going to be positive for the market. Also seems like the president is gearing up into fiscal stimulus mode. So next year is the midterm elections. Historically speaking, uh, whoever wins the

[00:03:05] presidency usually loses Congress, uh, during the midterm elections. That's a, you know, very, very high likelihood thing. Um, but, you know, I no one wants to lose elections, so they want to do whatever they can to try to, uh, improve their chances. Now, we had a taste of this just last week when the president announced uh, 1776 bonus payments to all service employees. And of course, he's trying to push for $2,000 tariff refund checks to the American public. I don't know if they can do it, but that kind of shows his thinking. He wants to do fiscal stimulus. He wants to boost the market. He wants to see if he can get elected, at least not elected, if the Republicans can continue to hold Congress, which is very difficult given the setup, given uh historical trends, and of course given his polling numbers. President has not been doing very well when it comes to polling. Now an interesting observation that uh Vincent Dawir made in on his podcast

[00:04:05] with um Kevin Mureer on the market huddle which is a great podcast that I recommend is that you know it seems like as the politics change the stakes go much higher and so there's more of an impetus to to not lose elections. Uh for example uh who is the current president in Brazil or president Lula? Where was president Lula before he was president? Well jail. uh who was the former president of Brazil, president Bossaro. Where is he today? Jail. And you know, this is this is kind of like uh it seems like it's kind of like the Game of Thrones, right? As uh Cersei Lannister memorably said, you win or you die. And so the trend seems to be that when you have power, you persecute your political enemies. And so when you lose power, there's a high likelihood that bad things happen to you. And this is really common in countries. I pointed out in Brazil, but it happens a lot all over the world. South Korea for example, very common for former presidents to end up in jail, uh, in Taiwan, a former

[00:05:07] president is also in jail for corruption. And of course, it even happens in places like like France, you know, former president Nicholas Sarcoi spent a few weeks in jail as well. So uh what I observe is that in the past few years say so looking at what President Trump has been doing uh he's been filing lawsuits against uh Leticia James Comey so very much using the legal system to you know carry out some settle some political disputes. Now to be fair this also happened to him when he was running for presidents. You remember he had all sorts of people come out and launched all sorts of lawsuits against him. Leticia James memorably tried to um you know caus some troubles for a loan that the president got from Deutsch Bank where the president allegedly inflated his real estate asset holdings to get a better loan but of course you know everyone does that. The bank conducts their own due diligence and the loan was repaid. This is something that everyone does um and but the president was singled out for it. Right? So often times what happens when you have um politically motivated prosecutions isn't

[00:06:09] that they so much that they bend the law which that happens as well but selective persecution selective prosecution where things that would have normally never been uh be prosecuted end up being prosecuted. Right? The enormous amount of laws uh no one can really fully stay in compliance. So, you know, show me the man and I'll show you the uh the lawn fracture or something like that. So, it seems like the trend in the United States is more of a weaponization of the legal system and so no one wants to lose and so they're going to do everything they can to try to pump the market up. Um so for me, I just can't be bearish in this scenario like policy is shifting towards accommodation even though the chart does look a bit toppy. Even though I believe that AI is kind of a huge bubble and it when it deflates it will take the major indexes down since so much of the indexes are these you know these max 7 tech names. We do see some some violent rotations. Right now you

[00:07:10] see uh commodities right now it's mostly like you know gold silver related stuff but in aluminum in steel you also see these industrial metals doing well so and copper as well. So you do see a bit of a rotation under the surface but again the indexes are just really tech heavy and so we do if we do have this AI pop um it it will it will impact indexes. So, you know, base cases, I think that, you know, we're going to go higher, at least in the first half of the year. In the second half of the year, though, again, that's a lot of time. Maybe that's time for the A bubble to pop. Maybe at that time, the market is becoming increasingly concerned about potentially the president losing Congress. And in that case, it also loses a lot of levers to stimulate. And so, maybe they're pricing out less uh, you know, less ways to boost the market. Maybe, as I've talked about many times, um, that the dollar continues to weaken and maybe we have foreign investors maybe rebalance out a little bit out of the US since they are very he was heavy. So I I

[00:08:11] do think that next year is going to be a down year in the markets. Just ballpark it. Let's say uh 6,500. So 500 lower than we are today. Again, just just guessing here. Just I think we'll have a volatile year. But my instinct is that uh if you just you know stayed in cash the next year out of the S&P, you probably feel positive at the end of the year. So, let's put 6,500 down for the S&P 500. Next, let's go to gold. Now, man, gold has been really on a tear. Now, if you look at it little brother, silver, as of recording, silver is up 7% on the day. It's just going parabolic. Now, there are many many narratives for this. It does seem like there is a squeeze for physical and in silver at least. Uh again, globally, a lot of fiscal deficits. uh maybe the US is going to cut rates more and so forth. So there are good fundamental factors for this

[00:09:11] but at the end of the day if you just know a little bit about trading about human psychology it looks like it's going for a blowoff top right and so uh I want to be positive on the precious metals but when I see something like this silver going up 7% of the day on the day it's going to burn out right it's going to it's going to surge it's going parabolic I don't know how high it can go this is purely an uh something about it's purely about trading psychology ology herd psychology here. So, uh it makes me really cautious. Now, at the end of the day, I still believe uh silver, gold are going to have positive years, but seeing all this volatility, seeing all this upward parabolic action, it makes me uncomfortable. So, that tells me that we have a lot of leverage, fragility. We're probably going to consolidate for probably a good part of the year after this parabolic thing blows off. So, my best guess, gold ends the year higher next year. Say five, no, sorry, 5,000. So, we're around where are

[00:10:12] we today? Actually, 4500, right? Around 4,500. So, 5,000. So, um yeah, but I I don't think it's going to be as swift and I don't I think it's going to be choppy because a lot of stuff is happening. Okay, lastly, let's talk about rates. Now this is the part that I think is going to be the most interesting thing. Now the president is very clear, right? He gives you his Trump doctrine. The Trump doctrine as he lays out is that oh these central bankers so foolish whenever the market goes up they start u hiking rates to try to hit it down. That doesn't make sense. We don't want people who do that. We want people who you know make the market higher. We want people to cut rates. And it's basically a litmus test. If you want to be Fed chair under the Trump administration, you have to be uh you have to be committed to lower risks. And again, we have Governor Myron there, president's council of economic adviser on the Fed uh as governor for a few months. And what does he applicate? Big

[00:11:14] rate cuts, right? If you look at the dot plot, he's the guy who always wants 50 basis point cuts. So, the president wants lower rate cuts. Anybody appointed by him is going to want more rate cuts, lower rates as well now. And uh my full belief is that that is what's going to happen. We're going to get more rate cuts than the market is pricing in. Market thinks that maybe we'll cut to about 3% next year. Uh my base case is that we cut to about 2.5 next year. And so I think the market is not appreciating uh just how many cuts a Trump Fed can get. And you know there's all sorts of talk, oh it's not just the chair, we got all these presidents and so forth. But you know the way that I look at how the world works president much much more influential has the support of Congress and what I my sense is that you know when you're looking at the government the ultimate constraint is is political uh is political capital political will does the public support what you're doing what I find really

[00:12:16] interesting is that even as the president is you know clamoring for rate cuts you don't really hear anyone in the Democratic party just opposing this so much. My sense is that rate cuts are broadly popular among the public regardless if you're a Democrat or Republican uh because a lot of people are suffering. They want to buy homes. They feel like they're falling behind on their car payments and so they want lower rates as well. So this lower rate thing is kind of something the public wants and so you're not going to get a lot of push back. And so if the president will do whatever he he needs to do uh to get uh rates lower, I think that there will not be enough push back to stop him. So we are going to get big cuts next year. So even though we're going to get big cuts next year, that doesn't completely flow through to the 10-year. Again, the 10-year is largely largely the expected path of pet policy, but you also have things like, you know, term premium, swap spreads, and so forth. So my best

[00:13:17] guess is that the 10 year ends lower. Let's say about 5 I'm sorry 4%. So we're about 4.15. So lower to about 4% at the end of next year. So a lot of people are I just want to address something really quick. A lot of people are like no now if the if the Trump Fed cuts rates really low you know the bond market will revolt. We'll have this big bond vigilante episode and rates will explode higher. Now from my view that is definitely not how the world works. Now rates obviously largely the expected path of Fed policy. Now uh a few months ago last year we had an episode where the Fed cut rates and we had the tenure actually rise. It's actually really easy to see what happened there if you look at the short-term interest rate futures. What happened was the market was afraid. The Fed was overtightening and was pricing in a recession. And as the Fed got ahead of that priced in got ahead of that the market actually priced out future rate

[00:14:18] cuts the market became less concerned about a recession and so they priced out future cuts and so the tenure rose. So it's it's you know if you look at these short-term interest rate futures it's actually quite clear what happened there. Now, something else I would really like to emphasize is that this entire mental model about, you know, short-term interest rates go low, inflation comes roaring back, and then bond market goes out of control. That's just obviously obviously not how the world works, right? Full stop. We have decades and decades of of experience to show that's not how the world works. Now, think back just after the great financial crisis. Interest rates are at zero. Fed buying bonds massively, interest rates super low, and yet there was like below target inflation for for a decade. Like the Fed desperately trying to get inflation up, but they just couldn't. And you can look across this ocean and look at Japan as well, right? They have low inflation,

[00:15:19] disinflation, deflation for decades and decades now. They're not even doing um you know, Kiwi. They're doing negative interest rates. They're buying equities and they still couldn't get this inflation up. So, the connection between short-term interest rates and economic activity, inflation, that's something that's just not that strong, right? We have decades and decades of of experience that shows that. Furthermore, more recently, we got short-term interest rates up all the way to 5%. Everyone is expecting a recession and we did not get a recession, right? GDP continues to hum along. So you have to adjust your mental model by this very very obvious evidence. But that's just not how the world works. And it's really easy to see, let's say, just to think about if you think about it a little bit, have a little bit of business experience to see why it's not how the world works. Let's say you're a business, right? Your interest rate expense is one of your costs, one of your expenses, but it's only one of of many. You have labor costs, you have material costs, you got rent, uh you got

[00:16:21] to pay regulatory fees and advertising, marketing, so so forth. And different businesses are going to have a different proportion of this. But for the most businesses, interest expense is not going to be the biggest expense. If you're a real estate investor, maybe if you're building a huge factory, yeah, it's going to be a big part of your uh expenses, but most businesses aren't. We are in a serviceoriented economy, right? So that's just not how that works. But more importantly, it's also about the top line as well. If you're a business, you have you're going to think about your revenue, right? What is your expected growth in market share? Um how how popular do you think your product will be and so forth. So even if uh interest rates are very high, your interests are are high, but if you think that revenues are going to go higher, you're going to have great demand for your product, you're you're still going to do your business, right? So, it's just uh interest rate expense, short-term interest rates, very influential for the market broadly, but

[00:17:23] very obviously just one part of any business and just not that impactful on economic activity. Here's a really interesting thought experiment uh to think about. Let's say tomorrow J Powell just everyone comes out, you know, stands on stage and just tells everyone, "Guys, I'm going to change the the inflation target." It was 2% but you know I had a conversation with my friend President Trump and I suddenly I saw the light. This is just not the way to run the economy. I want the inflation target to be 5%. What do you think would happen? Does the bond market go crazy? Uh the economy implode? Some people will think that. But I think if that were the case, you would have a massive, massive rally in the bond market because what that tells you is that the Fed is uh way below its inflation target. So what is it going to do? It's going to cut rates, maybe cut to zero. And if you have that huge, huge

[00:18:24] rate cut priced in for the next few years, that's going to drag the long end down in a big way. Now, you can also think, whoa, but the Fed is saying that he wants a 5% inflation target. Of course, we got to sell the long end. But here's the thing. Can the Fed achieve its target? The obvious obvious thing you see from decade from the past few decades is no. A central bank has enormous power over interest rates, financial markets. But on the real economy, its power is limited. It cannot achieve its alone achieve its uh inflation targets. So uh that cannot be priced in with certainty. So in any case, next year I think it's going to be a good year for bonds. I think we'll get a Trump Fed going to put rates much lower and I'd say, you know, 10 year will go down, term premium will go up, say about 4%. In any case, um again, these are just uh my best views based on what I have today. Now, I do change my

[00:19:26] views regularly and I update that in my market view portfolio which I have on my website. Now you'll see in the market view portfolio this year that you know for the most most of the year protected everyone from the huge huge uh liberation day apocalypse that big 20% draw down but made a mistake and thought that we would go lower and just kind of missed that rebound in a big way. However, we did buy back during the November dip. But more importantly the market portfolio was tremendously bullish gold and had a huge allocation earlier in the year. And so if you look at the performance year to date, we still beat the S&P 500 by 10%. And so you can get these equity calls wrong and still be okay. So hopefully we'll do well again next year. Have no idea, no promises, but again, I think it's going to be an interesting year. All right, talk to you all next week.
