[00:00:00] Now, we know how central bankers are just itching to raise their policy rates in response to oil, primarily those over in Europe. But, it's not just Europe, it's actually spreading. In fact, just today, earlier today, an official from the Bank of Korea said, "Hey, you know what? Oil prices are up. Therefore, we need to stop our rate cuts and start thinking about rate hikes." We get all that. But, what do the markets think? What are markets actually pricing, especially once we get out of the short-run hawkishness from central banks? What do the curves tell us about what to expect from there? In a word, frown. There are clues about rate frowning hidden on the yield curve, for example, but it's not as easy nor straightforward to decipher. But, this is where forward rate markets come in. SOFR futures are far from perfect, and to me, they're significantly inferior to the old eurodollar futures contracts, but for our purposes, they'll do. Because when you check the SOFR futures curve, that's what you get, the frown. So, what is the futures frown? Well, it's two parts that add up to a single phrase which sends

[00:01:01] chills up the spine of every official central banker everywhere. Policy error. And while that term is often misused by the mainstream, it absolutely applies here. The higher oil prices go in the short run, the more likely both parts of the futures frown come into play. First, you got that hawkish itch, which will only get stronger the higher petroleum, gasoline, and diesel all go in the short run. And the futures prices for those keep pointing to, and I hate to use the phrase, higher for longer on energy costs. But, the real magic comes in the second piece of that frown, and that has been reshaped a couple times more recently. But, also keep in mind as we go forward, we're not just going to focus exclusively on forward rates, though that's where it's most easy to see what we're talking about. Interest rate swaps is another market, and it's doing the same exact thing and adds up to the same frownish future signal. Now, before we get to SOFR and the frown, let's do a quick update where the energy shock really stands. Global oil benchmarks are up sharply here on Monday, led by Brent futures, which have

[00:02:02] surged another 5%. Now, cash prices, as we've gone over recently for various oil types, they continue to be even higher still. Over in the US, WTI futures, that one is up 3 and 1/2% to 105.50. It's the prompt spread on the futures curve, which is the difference between the front contract and the next one in line. That one's about five bucks, and the three-month spread, the benchmark there is a little over $14. Now, these spreads may be down from their most extreme levels, but if not for, you know, recently, today's spreads would be at records. So, what they say is that the oil market remains under extreme duress with intense demand for delivery at the nearest opportunities. That's the, you know, cash spot market but also the still rising chance the shock sticks around even longer, something that no one really wants. That's especially true as the shock translates into gasoline, diesel, and other types of fuels that we actually use. Wholesale gas over at the CME is up

[00:03:05] to $3.73 a gallon as of this morning, continuing to surge ahead of the WTI futures price. That's not just the highest for RBOB since 2022, it's rapidly closing in on those highs and threatening to surpass them. And obviously, that would be bad news for the economy everywhere, consumers most of all. As I told you last month, energy costs, primarily gasoline, are moving closer to cash oil prices rather than WTI futures in particular. And naturally, the higher they all go, the longer the energy marketplace stays this way, we all know what's going to happen across global central banks. Picture Casey Jeff at the Fed huddled in the corner of his office, sweating profusely, screaming, "Remember Volcker! Remember Volcker! Remember Volcker!" That's only a slight embellishment, but we know that central banks have shifted more and more recently toward their hawkish side. They see oil prices go up, and they want to respond to them as if they were Paul Volcker reincarnated.

[00:04:05] Before we go on with our video today, let me ask you a question. What if your gold could actually pay you every single month in more gold? That's what today's video sponsor, Monetary Metals, lets you do. And here's how it works. You still own the gold, it's still in your name, it's fully insured, but instead of just sitting there doing nothing, it actually starts working for you. Monetary Metals has built a system that turns idle gold into productive gold, earning real yield paid in physical gold, not dollars. No selling, no trading, no converting. You keep your gold, and every month, you get more of it. It's a simple idea, but it solves a big problem. If gold is money, it should act like money, and now it finally can. If you're a long-term gold holder looking for a smarter way to store value, check them out at monetary-metals.com/snyder. Again, that's monetary-metals.com/snyder. I highly recommend booking a call with

[00:05:06] them today to see if they're the right fit for you. We thank Monetary Metals for their sponsorship, but now, let's get back to the rest of our video. It's not just the Fed, it's being led by Europe, and it's it's spreading around the rest of the world. And you don't have to take my word on it for this part. The higher oil goes, the more hawkish most officials become because they can't help themselves. We've seen countless examples, starting recently with 2024, the sticky inflation that wasn't, and of course, 2022 itself. Don't forget 2008. While these central bankers see themselves as the reincarnation of Paul Volcker, who, if you didn't know, he's the former Fed chairman who we've been told ended the Great Inflation, even though nothing could have been further from the truth, but what 2026's group of central bankers are more likely replaying is Jean-Claude Trichet, as we'll see in the market curves. He's the guy at the ECB who raised rates in the middle of 2008 and then did it again in the middle of 2011. Now, the reason why there's this disconnect is the official mainstream economics theory on

[00:06:07] inflation. It's just garbage nonsense absurdity, primarily based on what's called expectations theory, which simply says, once you, me, and everyone else starts to see higher costs for things across the economy, we begin to alter our behavior expecting inflation to be high into the future. We start buying things today before the prices go up, and that buying itself ends up being, or at least heavily contributing to, the inflation that we were afraid of in the first place. And while it all sounds plausible, there is no evidence for it anywhere at any time. And policy makers, they know this, too. Yet, they have no choice but to stick with it because they don't have any other clue or any other alternative. As we know here at Eurodollar University, officials have no idea what's going on in the economy, let alone in the monetary system, which is where legitimate inflation comes from, at least the kind that gets sustained. So, they've incorporated expectations theory into their econometric models, and that's how they ended up with Trichet, not just in 2008, as I said, but also in 2011.

[00:07:09] And as I've shown before, it wasn't only the ECB back then. The Fed under Ben Bernanke was this close, this close, to following the Europeans in the middle of 2008. Can you imagine that? The guy said subprime was contained in 2007, and then if he did follow the ECB and raise rates in the middle of 2008, I mean, I guess they'd have to give him two Nobel Prizes to cover everything up, to cover up the shame. So, at the Federal Reserve meeting last week, the vote to pause rates right where they are produced the most dissents the committee has seen in over 30 years. Now, we still had the one dissent from Mester, who wants a rate cut, but now you've got three dissents. They're not necessarily agitating for a rate hike, they just don't want the Fed to outright state that they think their next move is going to be a rate cut. So, it's slightly more hawkish than they had been at the previous meeting in March. And that was Cleveland, Barr, Dallas, Logan, and Neel. Keep in mind, Casey Jeff, he probably would have dissented, but he doesn't get a vote this year. But, you can bet he was right there

[00:08:09] egging them on. So, not overly hawkish, but a visible shift in that direction at the Federal Reserve. Now, over in Europe, the ECB has laid the groundwork for a hike at its next meeting in June. The same for the Bank of England. The Bank of Japan ended up with a similar split to the Fed, moving more in the same direction. And another one that's now itching for hawks is South Korea. One voter from that country's central bank policy committee said earlier today that prices are facing, {quote} significant upward pressure, thanks, Captain Obvious, and that, {quote} it's time to consider stopping rate cuts and thinking about increases. And we could go on and on with examples. The global balance has shifted out of the Pringles can, but only temporarily. That's the key here. It is, to use their word, transitory. Now, everyone knows the economy's facing significant upward pressure on prices. That's not the issue here. It's what that significant upward pressure becomes, runaway inflation or the other historically consistent option the markets and at least few central bankers are seeing as more likely.

[00:09:11] That's the frown. The world's officials all go full on Trichet over oil and expectations theory, but then realize a little later on it was a big mistake, the policy error. They didn't produce the downside, they were wrong about the inflation upside from the very beginning. It's not like their rates go too high and cause the recession. They make The error is them assuming higher oil prices end up being inflationary, requiring policy rates to move up in the first place. Oil shocks become recessions, not great inflations. So, knowing that, and also knowing how badly central bankers want to Trichet themselves as the higher oil prices go, what shape do you think the forward rate market would take, the forward rate curve, SOFR What shape should the SOFR futures curve be understanding both parts of the central bankers in the near term and then the long run likelihoods beyond it. Not even long run, intermediate likelihoods beyond it. What curve shape would you expect from SOFR futures? It would be a frown.

[00:10:15] The market is forecasting a decent non-zero chance that even the Federal Reserve might jump in on the rate hiking at some point. Thus, it's upward sloping in the relatively near term. But since that's an error, a mistaken interpreting the danger of oil prices and what they really represent, they're downward sloping into next year. So, rates go up and then come right back down. And keep in mind, the curve was sharply sharply inverted still before the Iran conflict began on February 27th, which is the last day before the missiles really started flying and the ships stopped shipping, look at how steeply inverted SOFR futures had been. That was a combination of flat beverage worries and private credit. Both of those increasingly likely to force the FOMC, even the KC Jeff gang, back into the Pringles can at some point, probably later this year. Now, starting March 2nd as the Iran conflict erupted, oil surged, SOFR futures were hit hard. In other words, the forward rate market knew exactly what had changed and it wasn't inflation prospects. Everyone

[00:11:16] knew officials wouldn't be able to resist becoming Trichet. Contract hedges were taken out and were bought against the shifts among central banker boardrooms, not out there in the real economy. That's why even those early days in March as oil and gasoline jumped, the frown developed. It was all about a short-term reverse in short-term rates driven by policy makers stricken by Volker fever fantasies. But then look what happened once the oil prices slacked off in the first half of April. The upward slope at the front of the frown disappeared and the curve almost almost went back to fully inverted, the same fully inverted shape from late February. Again, the market isn't changing its outlook on the economy, it's changing how it interprets how central bankers will interpret oil. And over the last couple of weeks with energy prices surging again, the frown has come roaring back. But notice how it isn't nearly as frowny as it been back in March. That's the market downgrading the Trichet tendency despite central bankers statements and indications showing they're even more hawkish today

[00:12:17] than they were not all that long ago. Because that's the final variable in the frown. Just how much runway central bankers might actually have to play act Volker. If the economy falls off more quickly, and the higher oil prices go, the more likely that becomes, then they flip from short run hikes to Pringles even faster, which means there aren't as many rate hikes in the short run and the return of cutting rates comes much sooner and develops even faster. They all think they're being Volker when the markets are consistently pricing total Trichet. Now, as I said in the introduction here, it's not just forward rate markets. We can see the same interpretation out of interest rate swaps and interest rate swap spreads. They're right there with forward rates. So, it's not as clear and visually obvious like it is for SOFR futures and the frown. You look at the curve and you immediately understand what that means. Rates go up a little bit in the short run, then go back down and maybe a lot farther not too far down the road. Now, swap spreads looking at everything the same way. Those were compressing again

[00:13:18] from late in January, which is the same combination of flat beverage and blue owl that had the SOFR curve steeply inverted. The more negative swap spreads represent the same thing as a heavily inverted forward rate curve. The expectation that short-term rates are going to go down and probably by a lot. Now, where swap spreads take this even further is by adding another time dimension to it. In this case, rates go down just like SOFR futures. They go down by a lot just like SOFR futures before March, but then they stay there for a long time. That's the verdict and prediction and forecast from the swap spread market. And that didn't change with the energy shock. If anything, spreads kept compressing further as oil and gasoline really started to pick up. The swap market looking into the future and seeing the historical energy shock case take shape. And in April, that did back off a little bit in the swap market. Spreads decompressed a little, meaning became less negative with oil coming down. So, maybe not as much economic damage and recession leading to panicky central bankers having to cut as far as they would have or taking a

[00:14:18] little bit longer to get there. That's probably the more likely scenario. But by and large, the swap market didn't really change up throughout the energy shock the entire way so far, moving back closer to last year's extremely negative spreads. That's not central bankers raising rates a lot because of oil leading to out of control inflation. It is officials getting a rate hike, maybe two in there before realizing they messed up again and having to do what they were going to be forced to do before March and the Iran conflict. Swaps are right there with SOFR futures and the SOFR futures curve frown. And we should also note because markets sure do, that there are counterbalances out there among all the Trichets running around, the hawkish central banks. Central bank committees are not monolithic. There are sane and rational voices out there. I mean, after all, the Federal Reserve, while there were four dissenters and three the hawkish variety, that left eight, the majority, to suggest what the markets are. That there is a historical case for, okay, we don't really know what's going on oil prices. We're We're sympathetic to the

[00:15:20] expectations theory argument, but however, we also know we remember what happened in 2008. We also know the historical case on the energy shock. So, a lot of officials, while the hawks get all the noise, a lot of officials are, hey, we don't really know which way to turn. Some of them are indeed aware expectations theory is questionable, to put it charitably, how historically energy shocks lead to recession. And that there really are way too many similarities to Jean-Claude Trichet right now. And the best example of this reasonable rational take is our neighbors up in Canada. I pointed this out last week, too, how the Bank of Canada is quote looking through oil prices right now, understanding how there will be a short run impact from gasoline to CPIs, but that there aren't any indications, starting with historical precedent, to believe anything else. But because the economy's already weak up there to begin with, just look at the Canadian labor market, officials should not and really cannot overlook that downside case, the other side, the far side of the futures frown. Even over there in Europe, where the insanity has

[00:16:21] been dialed up, there are a few sane voices. Maybe it's just like they seem sane by comparison to all the hawk crazies, but here's one, well, at least one example from already earlier today amidst all this Trichet fever. Quote, "Concerned about a possible Eurozone recession is real and justified as conflict in the Middle East causes a supply side disruption." European Central Bank Governing Council member Yannis Stournaras said in an interview with another Greek word I can't pronounce. The guy who heads the Bank of Greece told the Cyprus-based outlet, "There's no sign of significant pass-through of higher energy prices to inflation, though it's too early for precise estimates." Now, his colleague at the ECB, Olli Rehn, also admitted there are quote, "No obvious signs of second order effects." We talked about second order effects just earlier, on broad consumer prices. That's when energy costs go up and force the prices of non-energy goods and services to rise as a result. And that's where the whole argument has been. We know energy costs are going up and it's going to contribute something,

[00:17:22] but is it going to lead to runaway inflation in an even broader set of consumer goods? But this whole argument is one that should be very familiar to everyone. It's exactly what these same Trichets had said would happen last year from tariffs when, once again, it was more the opposite than not. Tariffs push up the cost of materials and some goods, but it didn't lead to runaway or even detectable acceleration in broad consumer prices. Companies wanted to raise what they charged consumers, but in example after example, what happened instead? Those who tried lost a ton of volume and many of them ended up pulling their prices back down all over again. We went over Pepsi, McDonald's, all of those. Worse, as those businesses absorbed higher tariff-induced input costs, it squeezed their margins a little bit more than they had been, convincing employers to cut back on employment. It didn't lead to inflation. Tariffs made the flat beverage labor market a little bit flatter. The energy shock is far far more likely to do the

[00:18:23] same and in a much bigger way as the frown in the forward rate market and on the Greek ECB guy all show. Now, the Treasury or any of the global government bond markets are pricing the same thing as forward rates and interest rate swaps. It's just that they're much harder to see it see clearly because you end up having to parse the flatness of positive spreads. So, we got to give it to flawed SOFR futures here. You want an easy visual of an energy shock and its two likely effects on short-term rates, look no further than the frown. First, central bankers go crazy thinking Volker over inflation when it's just oil. Then they realize later on they Trichet'd themselves and are heading back toward the historical energy shock case. The frown is not only a perfect visualization of that process, it also, unfortunately, fits the circumstances. And it's not just Canadian central bankers that are sounding sane, the behavior of European banks. Not European central banks, but European banks also consistent with the frown. That's in the

[00:19:25] video link below. As always, thank you very much for joining me. Huge thank you, Euro Dollar University members and subscribers. And until next time, take care.
