[00:00:00] If you walk down Change Alley in the City of London, you’ll come across a blue plaque marking the site of Jonathan’s Coffee House a bit further down the street look up and you’ll see a memorial to Garraway’s – another long-gone coffee shop, both lost in a fire in 1748. Just around the corner where the Jamaica Wine House is today, you’ll see a third sign - marking the location of the first coffee house in London. While Change Alley is fairly nondescript today – it was the busiest part of the city in 1720 – and not because of the quality of the coffee – which was described in a review at the time as tasting like a hideous brew of burnt breadcrumbs, hickory and one hopes some fraction of actual coffee beans. Another – less charitable - review described it as smelling of lucifers deep furnace – with a stench that would stifle virtue and good manners – so I guess a bit like one of those pumpkin spice latte’s… (This is probably why Starbucks won’t sponsor my channel) but anyway…

[00:01:07] In 1720 – Change Alley had not yet had its name abbreviated– it was called Exchange Alley and it was the busiest street in the city, because those coffee shops were where people went to trade shares in the South Sea Company – a company whose stock price rose from around a hundred pounds at the start of the year to over a thousand pounds by the summer without the fundamentals of the business changing whatsoever. The Royal Exchange – which is just across from Exchange Alley had been established by Royal Charter in 1571. There was a limit of 100 licensed brokers who could trade on the exchange. Brokers acted as intermediaries - executing orders for their clients and charging a commission. They weren’t allowed to sell shares to a client if they had a position in the stock as this was seen as being a conflict of interest. Stock Jobbers on the other hand – a less reputable crowd - bought and sold securities on their own account making

[00:02:11] a profit from the price differences between what they paid when they bought and the price they sold at. This was a risky business – but one where ordinary people sometimes made extraordinary fortunes. Walter Thornbury wrote in 1878 of a watchmaker turned stockjobber named Quare who made such a fortune on Exchange Alley that the Princess of Wales, the Duchess of Marlborough and 300 quality guests attended his daughter’s wedding. In 1698 the stock jobbers had been expelled from The Royal Exchange – because of their terrible behavior and at first - they took up trading in the street outside the exchange. After a short while - the city government prohibited them from meeting on the street, so, they started to meet up to trade stocks at Jonathan’s Coffee House – and soon all of the other coffee houses in Exchange Alley. Exchange alley was the perfect location for this business as it sat right between the General

[00:03:12] Post Office and The Royal Exchange and when news from around the world arrived in London, it usually came via the post office and thus the jobbers in the coffee shops would often hear the news before it worked its way up to the Royal Exchange or The Bank of England. Exchange alley was an unruly place – and the news that spread wasn’t always true. One afternoon according to legend - a uniformed horseman galloped down the Queen's Road, proclaiming that Her Majesty – The Queen had died. Prices began to collapse – as a new Monarch might be unwilling to pay the debts of the old one – and might support different companies. It was noticed however, that one group of jobbers mostly kept to themselves – and only stepped in to buy near the market lows. It turned out to have been a hoax – the queen was fine – and the jobbers had been tricked out of their stock. 1720 was a year of two bubbles and a plague.

[00:04:12] The bubbles were the Mississippi Company in France –and the South Sea Bubble in England. In September, when the bubble burst, England was plunged into an economic and political crisis – this was one of the first examples of a financial boom and bust and was the event that gave rise to the use of the term bubble to describe a spectacular market failure. The plague which came towards the end of the year - devastated the population of Marseille and made the already terrible economic conditions in Europe even worse. The South Sea Company is frequently described as being like a financial shell – with no real operations where a mania amongst investors drove the price higher and higher until the bubble finally popped– but there was actually some sense to what happened – and the Company itself didn’t collapse into bankruptcy when the bubble burst – it was only wound down in 1853 – 133 years later.

[00:05:14] In today’s video lets look at what the South Sea Company did, who made and lost money in the bubble, the flaw in the company’s structure that led to all of the problems, the corrupt politicians and most importantly how the different reactions to bubbles bursting in England and France contributed to Britain’s later victory over France ninety five years later at the Battle of Waterloo – concluding the Napoleonic wars. Before we get to that, let me tell you about this week’s video sponsor – Rocket money! one of my New Year's resolutions was to cancel the subscription services that I'm no longer using this can be frustrating and feels like a bad use of your time well today's sponsor rocket money is here to help rocket money is an all-in-one Finance platform that helps you save more and spend less this personal finance app allows you to manage subscriptions lower bills build a custom budget and grow your

[00:06:15] savings all in one place it safely and securely identifies recurring charges and cancels unwanted subscriptions for you it'll even negotiate the type of bills like internet service that tend to drift up over time if you ignore them and allows you to set budgets and monitor your credit to save more and spend less join the 5 million plus members using rocket money go to rocket money.com Patrick or click the link in the description to get started for free or unlock even more features with premium that's rocket.com Patrick to get started for free get your money right Today we use the term bubble to describe a situation where the price of a stock, or asset class, inflates well beyond any fundamental value - as investors suspend disbelief and just pump the price up until the bubble finally bursts with a spectacular price crash. The South Sea bubble

[00:07:18] and the Mississippi bubble are the two early examples that we use – usually assuming that the term bubble got applied to them afterwards – much like it did to the dot com bubble, but in the time of the south sea bubble – the term bubble was used as slang to mean scam. If someone was ripped off – you would say that they were bubbled out of their money. In fact, a popular song being sold as sheet music at the time was called the Hubble Bubble and it was about foreigners – like Scots, Irish, Italians and Jews conning people out of their money at Jonathan’s and Garraway – the two biggest coffee houses on Exchange alley. It’s sung to the tune of – Over The hills and far away – and starts out “The circumcised and uncircumcised come hear my song – and it only goes downhill from there… It is worth remembering that the South Sea Bubble occurred when the concept of hands-off investing was quite new. The development of the joint stock company in Britain allowed businesses to

[00:08:22] attract large amounts of capital from investors who could easily sell their shares to someone else if they needed their money back. Before this type of structure existed, partnerships and more temporary alliances meant that investors had to be more hands-on, and they would often own specific parts of a larger business like a ship or a machine. The joint-stock structure made it possible to pool capital from a wider base and to operate indefinitely, which was a more flexible and scalable approach to doing business. Eighteenth century London was filled with great thinkers who, inspired by scientists like Newton Hooke and Hailey at The Royal Society, were applying mathematics to the world of business like never before. Insurance policies were being written at Lloyds that considered probability and the time value of money. With all of these new things going on in the world, it is a mistake to think the investors of the times were simple fools caught up in a speculative bubble.

[00:09:25] While financial mathematics had not yet been worked out at the time – eighteenth century investors weren’t making any crazier investments than some people make today – and eighteenth-century investors didn’t have access to the same quality of information that we do. The South Sea company was established in 1711 largely at the initiative of Robert Harley – the newly in power chancellor of the exchequer. The company was established as a counterpart to the East India Company and the Bank of England – which were both dominated by a rival political party the Whigs. Harley was a Tory and didn’t want the opposing party to dominate finance and business. At the time there was intense political partisanship in UK between the two main parties and the Monarch - Queen Anne – was in poor health and not very involved in politics. Britain had been involved in two long and expensive wars, the nine years war which

[00:10:28] was quickly followed by the war of Spanish succession – which was still ongoing when the company was founded. Wars had grown more and more expensive over the years and by 1711 an army of seventy thousand men had to be paid, fed, clothed and armed. Each war had seen government borrowing peak at between 5 and 11 percent of GDP, with the government only able to run balanced budgets during the (relatively rare) peaceful intervals. This meant a steady growth in national debt. By the end of the war of Spanish Succession – England’s long term national debt had grown from 7 million pounds to over 40 million pounds – and that was just the long-term debt, there were short term floating rate loans too – which could be continued forever as long as the government kept up its interest payments, and on top of that there were debt like instruments like pensions and annuities that had to be paid too. By the time the company was established

[00:11:29] the government was already struggling to borrow. It had borrowed heavily from the East India Company and the privately owned Bank of England. The Treasury then turned to the public to borrow even more - and to entice lenders the government was issuing lottery loans – where if you bought a ticket, you stood a chance of winning a prize – but even if you didn’t win, you could hold on to the ticket and earn interest. In 1711 – to place thirty-year lottery loans – the government had to pay the prize money plus eight percent annually. The interest rate alone was 50% higher than private borrowers were paying at the same time. The War of Spanish succession was largely considered a Whig war – and now that the Tories were in power – Harley’s goal was to end the war and get the national debt under control. The plan was to use the South Sea company to consolidate and reduce the cost of England’s national debt. The idea was that lenders could transfer their bonds to this new private

[00:12:33] company in a debt for equity swap, exchanging the promise of regular interest payments for a stake in a new – hopefully profit-making concern. While this might sound like a wild scheme – it was not entirely new – The Bank of England had done something similar in 1697 - offering its shares in exchange for bonds when it looked like the government might default. Lenders had gone with this deal as the bet was that the bank – as one big lender – could negotiate more firmly with the government than all of the small bondholders could individually - and thus the debt was more likely to be repaid. This had worked for Bank of England Investors – so it could work for the South Sea Company too. To generate income, the company was granted a monopoly on trade with the islands in the "South Seas" and South America – all of which were Spanish colonies – England was at war with Spain at the time – so this was not an awfully

[00:13:34] valuable right. It did however have the potential for future profits – if peace was negotiated – and maybe even huge profits – if something unexpected happened like the collapse of the Spanish empire. Given the massive fortunes that East India merchants had made in international trade– and the success of the Bank of England’s debt for equity swap – this wasn’t as hare brained a scheme as it has since been made out to be. The exchange of government debt for company stock was to occur in five separate lots and the first two of these, totaling 2.75 million pounds, had already been arranged before the company's charter was issued. The companies stock initially traded at around the value of the debt that had been submitted – which means that investors were not paying any premium for the right to trade in the South Seas. In 1713 – as hostilities with Spain began to cool, Spain granted the company the right to sell up to 4,800 slaves per year at any port in South

[00:14:40] America. The African coast was mostly under the control of local African leadership and slave forts or castles were given to various European nations where they could buy slaves for transportation to their colonies – The Spanish didn’t have an African fort – so instead bought slaves - mostly from the Portuguese and Genoese, but later the Dutch, French, and British. The South Sea Company worked with an existing British slaving company – the Royal African Company and shipped thousands of people across the Atlantic which you can see in this chart. This trade was not particularly profitable for them for a number of reasons. Firstly, more slaves died at sea on their ships than on their rivals ships. Secondly, a line in their contract allowed buyers to purchase slaves with “the fruits of the country” meaning that buyers could pay with various commodities which often spoiled or fell in value while being shipped back

[00:15:44] to England, and thirdly – and most importantly - they discovered in the fine print that the King of Spain, Queen Anne of England and some other nobles got to claim 58% of the profits of each permitted trading journey – thus South Seas trade didn’t yield any real wealth those who had exchanged their government bonds for equity. But this didn’t matter much - as the traders in Exchange alley were just valuing the company as a pure financial play based on the value of the bonds it held – they didn’t really expect much of the trading license – at least to begin with. In 1714 Queen Anne died and her cousin George- a relatively remote German prince (who had the advantage of being a protestant) was made King of England. A year later the Tories lost in an election and the Whigs were now back in power. All of this should have been bad for the South Sea Company – but – the company- had become important enough to the financial system that

[00:16:47] it managed to survive Harleys fall from political power. The company agreed to forget a million pounds in payments due from the treasury – making itself useful to the new leadership. The new leaders had their work cut out for them, despite Harley’s efforts to bring the nations debts under control Britain’s finances were a tangled mess of loans that had been negotiated one by one as needed, some being lotteries, others annuities and others being linked to distinct streams of revenue – like taxes on beer. It took the Whig leadership three years to even work out how much money was owed and to whom – this was calculated by one of the youngest new ministers - Robert Walpole – who would later go on to be Britain’s first – and longest serving prime minister. Walpole came up with a comprehensive plan to improve the nations finances – by consolidating and refinancing the debt at the new lower interest rates. A big problem though - was that one third of the total outstanding loans were irredeemable

[00:17:53] bonds – they had been issued with a legally binding promise that they couldn’t be repaid ahead of schedule without their owner’s consent – and these were the highest interest rate bonds – with rates about double the prevailing rate. The bondholders were also some of the wealthiest and most politically connected people in England and it would be way too risky to try to force them to give up their high returns as the government might need to borrow from them again at some point in the future. These irredeemable bonds had one real downside for investors – they couldn’t be transferred to another person – so the one thing Walpole could offer the investors was liquidity in exchange for a lower interest rate. If they would exchange their bonds for lower yielding bonds – the new bonds could be tradeable – meaning that the investors could access their money whenever they needed it. Before this could be negotiated however – internal political disputes within the Whig party meant that

[00:18:57] Walpole was sidelined – he lost his position in both the cabinet and in the treasury in 1717. John Blunt – who had been leading the South Sea company loved a little financial trickery. A few years earlier when the government had failed to pay a million pounds in interest to the company, he had negotiated that the interest arrears could be transformed into South Sea Company Capital. Under the deal - that capital could be held as new shares, with a face value of one hundred pounds a share – which could be sold at the coffee houses at whatever price the market would bear. When interest rates went down – the value of the company shares had gone up, and that stock could be sold for more than one hundred pounds – a win for the South Sea company. In 1719, the company agreed with the treasury to conduct an experiment where they would swap South Sea Company stock for one and a half million pounds of irredeemable 9% bonds with thirty

[00:19:59] years remaining on them. While bond mathematics didn’t yet exist – they were able to work out a fair value by pricing the bonds as if they were land – with a rental cashflow equivalent to the bond coupon yield. The bonds would be swapped for newly issued South Sea company stock at a par value of one hundred pounds a share – but because the shares were trading in exchange alley at 115 pounds a share – anyone making the swap would be ahead on the deal. On top of that they would go from holding an illiquid asset to a liquid asset. The treasury would get a renegotiated lower interest rate out of the deal – and save money on administrative costs as they would only have to deal with one counterparty – as opposed to all of the individual bondholders. The real trick though was that to fund the bond purchase – the company would be allowed to issue equity at a par value of one hundred pounds per share – meaning that every thousand pounds to be loaned would add ten shares to the Company’s accounts. But the money that would actually

[00:21:02] fund that loan would come from selling shares at whatever price the market could bear. So, if Exchange Alley quoted prices above par, the Company would pocket the difference—in essence, enjoying the same windfall offered to those being enticed to swap their bonds for shares. At the time the shares were trading at £114 pounds per share. So, £100 pounds would fund the loan, leaving £14, or a 14 percent gain, for the Company itself. Which was good for existing shareholders, who would reap the benefit of the extra cash put in by new investors. The Company began selling new shares in the Spring of 1719 and everything went according to plan allowing the company to record a profit of 270 thousand pounds. This was seen as such a success that the company quickly began negotiating with the treasury to do it again – but this time around with the entire national debt. When this much bigger deal was pitched to

[00:22:05] parliament – there was a lot of excitement. Robert Walpole – who had been moved to the back benches – would have towed the party line – as he couldn’t succeed if the party didn’t succeed – but he had some scores to settle with his rivals within the party who had demoted him to the back benches. He praised the overall plan in parliament, but – possibly to cause a bit of trouble - questioned why the deal went straight to the South Sea company without any competing quotes. Shouldn’t the East India company and the Bank of England be allowed to bid too? After an auction process was decided upon – the South Sea company still won the deal, but now had to pay the Treasury 7.6 million pounds (which is over a billion in today’s money) for the right to do the deal. The bill that was voted on in parliament allowed the South Sea Company to create new shares at par value up to the amount of the national debt exchanged in the deal – but if the shares were trading above that value in Exchange Alley – they could offer debt holders

[00:23:09] a swap payment based on that market valuation – keeping the additional shares within the company – which could then be sold at the will of the company. This meant that the higher the share prices went – the more shares they could hold on to to sell on exchange alley at a profit. As the deal was being debated – Walpole once again inserted himself between rivals and their dreams of great wealth by pointing out the flaw in the deal and how it incentivized pumping up the stock price as doing so benefited existing shareholders at the expense of new ones. Maybe the deal should be restructured to be more fair. The south sea company insiders pursued a ruthless campaign of bribery – where the company’s cashier Robert Knight allocated free shares to any politician or grandee who could help close the deal. I’m sure this scale of corruption is shocking to modern day listeners – who can’t imagine a scenario where politicians

[00:24:12] are allocated tokens that could become valuable if they agreed to pump the price – but – things were different in eighteenth century England. It is hard to know if Walpole didn’t take any shares because of his morals – or because he was more interested in slowing down his rivals in parliament – for his own political gain - but the fact that his hands were clean in this deal helped in his rise to power after the bubble burst. As the deal was getting done, stock prices in general were rising on Exchange Alley. Daniel Dafoe wrote that April – right before the deal went live that “a man that is out of the stocks – may almost as well be out of the world”. South Sea Company stock almost tripled in value in the months leading up to the first swap on April 14th. Winston Churchill famously said that History is written by the victors – but in the case of the South Sea Bubble it was mostly written by the losers. Servants, politicians, lords and ladies were all drawn into the scheme with

[00:25:17] many facing bankruptcy when the market crashed. A lot of the well-known writers of the day also invested and lost out – and they were well placed to describe the financial carnage. Of course - a bubble like this is a zero-sum game – for everyone who lost money there had to be a winner, but the winners in this case had the good sense to keep quiet – as boasting about your gains when so many people lost their savings might draw the wrong kind of attention. There are a few stories that we do know – an analyst – who published his calculations as the stock price rose – a miser philanthropist who had bought in before the bubble and managed to exit near the top, company insiders who were forced to explain themselves before parliament, a duke – who lost everything trading derivatives on company stock and the greatest scientist in History – Isaac Newton – who also got involved. Archibald Hutcheson was a member of parliament who was fascinated by the calculations made by the scientists at the Royal Society. Once the deal

[00:26:22] was agreed upon, he saw an opportunity to test his mathematics by estimating a rational price for the company shares. The types of calculations done by modern equity analysts didn’t exist at the time, but people did understand that a business was worth more than the value of its physical assets. Hutcheson, starting in March 1720, began publishing pamphlets with his calculations of how successful the company would have to be to justify various stock prices. He treated the company’s profits as equivalent to the rent achieved on a piece of land. The company he argued had to do something profitable with its capital to justify the stock price. It would be receiving interest from the treasury which explained some of the price – but in order to justify a price of say - 200 pounds per share – he calculated that the company would have to make almost 3.5 million pounds a year in profit from trading with Spanish America – which he felt was impossible. South Sea

[00:27:25] voyages had - so far -struggled to bring in a hundred thousand pounds in total profit over the last three years- and in 1720 – the company didn’t ship any slaves to the south seas due to disputes with Spain. The way Hutcheson saw it – anyone could count, think and use the results of formal calculation to tame his emotions and make choices armored by reason. Unfortunately, mathematics was incomprehensible to the general public in 1720 – so no one paid any attention to his work. As the stock price rose, investors piled in, and South Sea shares hit 500 pounds on May 28th and closed at 720 pounds on June first – a gain of 50% in just four days. Thomas Guy was the son of a carpenter who learned enough Latin and Greek at school to be taken on as an apprentice book dealer at the age of 16. He set up his own business at the age of twenty-four,

[00:28:29] securing big clients like Oxford University. He later branched out into publishing. Some called him a miser because of his simple lifestyle. In 1711 Guy converted some of his government bonds into shares in the South Sea company at 100 pounds per share – in that first debt for equity swap. By 1720 he had already received ten years’ worth of dividends. He started selling his shares that April at 300 pounds a share, slowly exiting his massive position as the price went up. When he sold his last shares at 700 pounds that June he was done. He had amassed a fortune equivalent to around half a billion pounds in today’s money and committed it all to building a hospital to help the people of London - Guys hospital is still around today and is one of the largest hospitals in the UK. Guy kept no record of his thoughts, so we can only infer his reasoning from his behavior,

[00:29:31] but he possibly reached the conclusion that his shares were worth more as cash than as part ownership in a novel and increasingly uncertain financial experiment and sold up. The Duke of Marlborough was one of Britain’s wealthiest men, and his wife Sarah Churchill was an experienced investor. She appears to have converted some bonds into stock in the early days of the scheme – and while there are records of her writing a letter asking for stock allocations for some of her friends – she didn’t request any for herself. She sold her shares at 500 pounds, walking away with a tidy profit. Sarah Churchill was an ancestor of both Winston Churchill and Princess Diana. The Duke of Portland was another of Britain’s Wealthiest men having inherited vast estates from his father. Over the year of the bubble he signed twenty-four different forward contracts to buy company shares and when the bubble burst that

[00:30:33] summer – found that he owed far more to his creditors than he could ever repay – he wiped out his family fortune in just a few months. Isaac Newton is known to have invested in the South Sea Company too, and is quoted as having said "I can calculate the movement of the stars, but not the madness of men". While many have claimed that he lost money in the bubble – there is only one record surviving of his investment in the scheme – and that is of him selling his shares on April 19th of 1720 at three hundred pounds a share – when the stock had made its first great advance. Assuming that was his only trade – he would have tripled his money making a twenty-thousand-pound profit – a significant sum in 1720. Many of the people who made money in the bubble appear to be people who saw that a dull investment they owned had become a risky gamble and sold. Company insiders – you won’t be surprised to

[00:31:33] hear - did quite well too – with many selling their shares at high prices and buying vast amounts of real estate with the proceeds. So, what caused the stock price to inflate so fast? Well, John Blunt and the directors of the South Sea company understood very clearly - that the entire success of the scheme depended on pushing the stock price higher and higher - so they did everything they could, starting with bribing politicians and anyone else with influence. The first share subscription in mid-April required investors to put down only 20% of the purchase price and they could pay off the rest in installments over sixteen months. The next subscription required only a ten percent downpayment with the installments stretching out even longer. The third and fourth subscriptions came over the summer on similar terms. Allowing people to invest with borrowed money – and giving them more and more leverage will have helped the price soar. The Company’s shareholders voted early

[00:32:38] on - to allow the directors to lend money to investors using South Sea stock as collateral, creating a feedback loop that pumped more cash into a rising market. A financial writer wrote (after the crash) that everyone, including the shareholders who voted to give company officers this power, knew exactly what they were doing. On June 17, with the stock price near its all-time high, King George made John Blunt – the leader of the scheme - a Baronet, a title that survives in his family to this day. As the bubble inflated – other promoters took the opportunity to raise capital for their own business ventures – and many of these ventures were hare brained schemes – quickly thrown together to take advantage of the ease with which money could be raised at the time. The prince of Wales – the future King of England even got involved himself – lending his name to a venture called “The Welsh Copper Company and

[00:33:39] agreeing to serve as its governor. The prince was warned against getting involved in a stock market scam – which would taint his good name – but ignored his councilors – as he was paid forty thousand pounds for his involvement. The flurry of new stock offerings started to worry South Sea Company insiders that the new stocks would obstruct the rise in their stock. You can’t have distractions like this! They used their influence to pass a new law – The Bubble Company act – which declared all business that raised money in the manner of a chartered company without a charter from the royal government "illegal and void". Dozens of these companies shut down over the next few weeks – including the princes Welsh Copper Company. At its peak that summer Exchange Alley priced the South Sea Company as being worth more than all of the real estate in Great Britain. Then something surprising happened – the stock price

[00:34:39] started to slide. The company directors fought back by boosting the dividend – which caused a one day rise – but the stock price continued its fall – and was now falling just as fast as it had risen. While some blamed the bust on foreign investors pulling out – there was no big announcement or event – the game was just over. News of a plague in the port of Marseilles did nothing to help those hoping for another pump. Other stocks like the East India Company and the Bank of England rose and fell with the South Sea Company, but in a much more muted manner. The collapse of the south Sea company was a massive scandal, and a parliamentary committee was set up to uncover corruption. Those who had lost money argued that the whole deal should be unwound and all share transactions that occurred over the six-month period of the bubble should be made null and void. Robert Walpole who had been sidelined for most of the events was now being seen as the man who could solve the nation’s problems – he

[00:35:44] was one of the few in parliament whose hands were clean. He was pragmatic enough to try to ease the pain of the collapse but was clear that the nature of contracts meant that deal at its heart could not be undone. Robert Knight – the company cashier who had kept record of all of the company bribes to politicians – fled the country taking his records with him. A bit of a show was put on about trying to extradite him, but I don’t think anyone in parliament wanted his book of bribes being made public. From a government perspective - for all of the madness that had gone on in Exchange Alley – it had been a financial triumph for the nation – where the mess of high interest rate loans had been consolidated to one lender with a manageable interest rate and principal that could be repaid at any time. Sir John Blunt – the leader of the South Sea Company was hauled out in front of parliament to answer questions – but the problem for the politicians who were supposed to be grilling

[00:36:46] him was that he could take all of them down as he knew how much money they had all taken. Fortunately for them he refused to speak. Walpole whose personal record was clean, was still a party man and wanted to keep the Whig party in control, so while he was able to use the scandal to take out some political rivals within the Whig party – it was more important for him to keep things under control. The people who had been wiped out in the crash wanted revenge – and if they couldn’t get their money back, they wanted to see those responsible suffering too. Walpole had to make this happen while still keeping his party in control of parliament. The amount of bribery that had occurred was staggering – 1.7 million pounds in bribes and 1.8 million pounds in company loans had been distributed amongst almost two hundred members of both houses of government. Walpole sacrificed some to protect the rest. Six south Sea company directors who also held

[00:37:51] government posts were thrown under the bus. The House of commons expelled four members who were also company directors. South Sea Company officers were ordered to catalog their estates which were then seized and sold off for the benefit of south sea company investors. With that the major political battles came to an end and while the Whig party survived mostly intact, its center of gravity had now moved towards Walpole. Robert Walpole was appointed First Lord of the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Leader of the House of Commons. His tenure as "prime minister" is often dated to this point (the term prime minister was originally used – by his rivals - to make fun of how he had consolidated power.) The office of prime minister in Britain is not an official title, it only exists only by long-established convention, where the monarch appoints as prime minister the

[00:38:51] person most likely to command the confidence of the House of Commons – and Walpole is today considered the first British Prime Minister. In 1720, both Britain and France experienced financial bubbles and crashes, but their choices as to how to rebuild afterwards were very different and reverberated through the global war France and Britain waged over the next century. In France – like in London there was no bailout or do – over, and In France Law’s scheme had tamed the nation’s debt just like the South Sea Company had done in Britain. In France however 1.4 million stock transactions were reviewed and those who had exchanged debt were treated better than mere speculators – possibly because this preserved the social order. In France experiments with money – were over with, and the country returned to its old way of selling the right to collect taxes – an approach that made raising taxes in times

[00:39:52] of need extremely difficult. France went back to the old way of issuing irredeemable debt to make up for tax shortfalls, and borrowing in a haphazard way as needed. In Britain, the South Sea company was kept alive but scaled back significantly and kept under stricter government control. It was broken up with some of its capital being transferred to the Bank of England. The venturing arm was split off too – and they continued to do some trade with South America and even entered the whaling business- with little success – another Spanish war eventually brought that part of the business to an end. What was left of what had briefly been the largest private enterprise in the world became a financial back office where clerks processed debt issuance and interest payments for the British Government. The company slowly reprocessed the national debt into a single pool of liquid government bonds that could be easily bought and sold by investors on an exchange. Britain’s

[00:40:57] reliability in paying its debt brought interest rates down to just three percent per year. Having shown that the country could manage its debts prudently – whenever there was a need to borrow in time of war, investors were willing to lend. This financial consistency was Britain’s secret weapon in the Napoleonic wars. While France was twice as rich as Britain and French subjects outnumbered Britain’s by as much as three to one. In times of war, Britain was able to spend as much as four times as much money per subject. The fact that Britain kept its finances in better order meant that it could borrow more money at lower rates and fight France on a level footing. According to Thomas Levinson, over the course of the eighteenth century the size of the nations at war came to matter less than the ability to mobilize the resources that each state’s economy could produce.

[00:41:58] As well as Britain’s financial infrastructure worked for government – it was not as well suited to private enterprise. America’s corporate structure which allowed new companies to raise capital on stock exchanges while limiting the liability for managers became the next evolution of the financial system. The US had only half Britain’s population in the 1820’s but its bankers were able to place four times the loans into the US economy as their British counterparts could, making it easier for anyone with a business idea to get up and running in the United States. This ease of raising capital funded an explosion of commercial enterprises in America that was without precedent. There are many other reasons for Americas huge growth – such as the huge landmass and natural resources, but economic historians argue that Britain’s public borrowing monopolized the available capital reducing the amount of credit available to British businesses. If you enjoyed this video – you should watch

[00:43:03] this video on John Law and The Mississippi Company next which is all about the bubble that was happening in France at the same time. Don’t forget to check out our sponsor Rocket Money using the link in the description – have a great day and see you in the next video – bye.
