[00:00:00] Financial repression is a very appealing tax because the people who are being taxed actually don't know they're being taxed because it's all super complicated and you need to have at least a solid understanding of economics to even begin to understand what's going on. The Japanese public sector is arguably the largest currency carry trader in the world. What's the end game here? Today's episode is brought to you by the unlimited HFGM Global Macro ETF ticker HFGM. Later in the show, you'll hear more about HFGM, currently the number one Morningstar rated fund since its inception in the US macro trading category. Let's get into it. Today we're going to be talking about financial repression and fiscal sustainability. I'm so glad to be joined by Hanno Lustig, Mizuho Financial Group Professor of Finance at Stanford University. Professor, welcome to Monetary Matters. Thank you. Very excited to be here. The topic financial repression is something that stirs emotion deeply within a lot of

[00:01:00] people. What is this tool? What is financial repression? Financial repression is a term that is sort of used to describe anytime the government tries to fund itself by making sure that its funding costs are sort of below what the market rate would be. And and so it covers a wide array of different types of interventions and and I'm sure we're going to dive into specifics later. But it's it's sort of been very widely used, financial repression, not just in developing economies but also in advanced economies. In fact, there's plenty of examples from US history specifically during wartime when the federal government and the Fed

[00:02:01] decided to join forces and lower the federal government's cost of funding in order to aid the war effort. So, it's it's been widely used throughout history by most countries. But, it's somewhat understudied by economists, which which perhaps is something that we can talk about later. So, financial repression is the government enacting policies to fund itself at cheaper rates and perhaps more of it available rates so we can borrow more than might otherwise be available. So, one example might be passing laws that strongly encourage banks to hold government debt. Normally, you know, banks might want to make a higher return perhaps lending to individuals or corporations, but because of some regulation that the government passes, banks hold a lot of government debt. You could argue that we have that right now in the United States and in several countries and continents around around the world. That's one example, right? But, by the way, how old is financial repression? What is the first instance?

[00:03:03] I suspect that if you go back in time, I and you'll see plenty of examples of what we would now call financial repression, particularly when you look at wartime. So, one thing that I've done in some work with a couple of my co-authors is we looked at all US and UK wars. And the reason we focused on focused, excuse me, on the US and UK is because there's great data on bond issuance, bond prices for both of these countries. For the US, really going back to its creation, actually. And for the UK, you can go back to the 18th century at the very least. And so, what we found is that pretty much every time the UK or the US entered a major war, there was a concerted effort to keep yields on bonds artificially low,

[00:04:04] whereas at the same time, there was also a dramatic increase in inflation. The combined result of this is that government effectively managed to lower its cost of funding. And the way to think about that is that these governments were essentially shifting part of the burden of going to war away from taxpayers to bondholders. So, that's been a consistent pattern throughout history both for the US and the UK. And that's an important thing to realize because quite a few economists have made the point that the government's cost of funding historically has been low in the US, especially when you compare it to the growth rate of GDP. That's important because if that's true, that sort of means you're in this uh nice region of the parameter space where you can grow your way out of high debt to output ratios.

[00:05:06] But the thing to realize is that >> [clears throat] >> number that people usually look at for the government's cost of funding actually incorporates the effects of numerous episodes of dramatic financial repression both for the US and for the UK. And so, implicitly, what you're doing there is you're really taxing bondholders and savers, and that is something that you have to take into account when you look at these numbers. And and it's often actually overlooked, I think. So, you're saying that wars are extremely expensive, and if the government went to the taxpayers, and they went to the citizens, and they said this is how much it costs, and here is how much we're going to raise your taxes by, that would be ridiculously unpopular. So, instead of doing that, maybe they raise taxes a little bit, but they they they take it from people who invest in the government debt, instead of people who tax. That's what they do.

[00:06:08] That's exactly right. That's a a better way of saying what I was trying to say. The government, whenever they go to war, they think, "Boy, it's going to be way too expensive for us to finance all of this right away by increasing tax revenue, especially during wartime. We don't want to do that. We're only going to raise taxes a little bit, and instead what we're going to do is we're going to shift a big part of the burden of the war, whatever the case may be. In the UK, one of the biggest ones was the Napoleonic War in the early 19th century, and and the First World War. We're going to shift a big part of that burden to bondholders, and you can see how politically that might be appealing, and it makes sense. To illustrate this, it might be useful to go back to you a little bit in in in of US history,

[00:07:09] to go back to the Civil War, actually, because there was something called the National Banking Act that was passed towards the end of the Civil War that did just that. So, what the federal government said is, "Okay, if you want to issue these greenbacks, pieces of paper that are going to be widely accepted as legal tender, um you can do so, but only if these are backed by holdings of treasuries. So, the federal government back in 1863 implemented a version of this. So, that's a very early example of what we would call financial repression because obviously you're giving the government a big edge as a borrower compared to other potential borrowers and it's definitely going to to lower the government's cost of funding and that was that was obviously the intent

[00:08:11] of the legislators when they passed this law. They wanted to make it easier for the Union to fund the war effort. And so, what exactly did they did they do to increase the funding availability of the war effort? So, they said, "Okay, if you want to be a national bank we're going to give you a charter and if you're chartered as a national bank and actually a number of the most prominent banks that are in operation today in the US were created back then as a result of the National Banking Act. So, what the federal government said, "We'll allow you to issue these bank notes that are going to be uniform across states and they're going to be widely accepted which is obviously appealing for these banks, right? Because that's a big source of seigniorage, but they could only do so if these banks were going to hold

[00:09:13] Treasuries as collateral. So, that was the quid pro quo in this arrangement and as I said, the intent clearly was to allow the government to lower its cost of funding and to help the Union finance the war effort, which was a big challenge by the way because when the Civil War started the federal government was the US federal government was was tiny as a fraction of GDP. And it had very few sources of revenue other than than tariffs, actually. Let's fast forward to World War II. What financial repression happened there? Oh, this is a fascinating piece of history. Basically, when the US joined the Second World War, the Fed and the Treasury got together, and they basically said, "Okay, what we're going to do is we're going to cap long-term yields. I think the number the exact number was 2.5%."

[00:10:14] And the Fed committed to being willing to step in and buy long-dated Treasuries if market yields were to creep above that ceiling. And so, that was an early form of yield curve control. The Fed actually also controlled short-term rates. And so, clearly, this is another example of a financial repression. This arrangement between the Fed and the Treasury lasted well after the Second World War, actually. But matters came to a head during the Korean War. What happened during the Korean War was fascinating. So, the Truman administration was in charge then, and they were intent on keeping government bond yields low because they were funding a major war. The Korean War was actually a

[00:11:15] surprisingly large war. And the Fed was getting nervous because in the late '40s and early '50s, inflation had started to pick up. And they were actually eager to get out of this arrangement with the Treasury in order to be able to set rates independently. And so there was actually a big standoff between the Fed and the Treasury. The Truman administration put a lot of pressure on the Fed in order to try and keep rates low, but ultimately the Fed pushed back aggressively. And there was a banker from Utah who was on the Board of Governors, Marriner Eccles, who played a key role there actually. He had been the chairman of the Fed prior

[00:12:16] to this, and he actually played a key role in sort of pushing back. And ultimately, what then happened, to make a long story short, is that in 1951, there was something called the Fed-Treasury Accord, >> [snorts] >> where basically the Fed told the Treasury, "Look, we are no longer going to be in the business of absorbing the issuance of Treasuries. Where we don't want to do that because we want to create a vibrant market for Treasury bonds where there's actual price discovery." And it's interesting when you read about this history, that Fed officials back then really understood that in order to have a real market for Treasury bonds, they had to get out of the way, basically, in order for them to allow real price discovery to happen,

[00:13:17] they had to convince market participants that they were no longer going to step in. So that was a radical departure from what had happened before because in the decade before they they really was no price discovery in the bond market. Basically, prices were set by the New York Fed's trading desk. So, that was a a big change and some have referred to this as the birth of the modern Fed. The Fed had been around for a few decades, but this was really where the Fed sort of signaled to the Treasury, "Look, we're we're no longer going to do your bidding. You do fiscal policy, we'll do monetary policy, and we're going to choose rates that are right for our purposes. The main objective, of course, being to fight inflation." So, a lot of important

[00:14:17] questions to ask as we move through this conversation. Is financial repression good or bad? It's such a simple question and the real question, Bonnie, is to for whom is it good? For whom is it bad? What different classes of savers versus borrowers, the private sector, the public sector. All of that we will get into in examples. Some economists have argued that maybe that is an optimal thing to do. There's a very famous paper in the '80s written by two very prominent economists, Bob Lucas and Nancy Stokey, and they kind of argued that whenever you go to war, you sort of want to do something like that. That is to say, you want to make sure that you're shifting part of the burden to bondholders instead of increasing taxes because taxation's distortionary >> [snorts] >> and in in doing in doing so, in shifting part of the burden

[00:15:18] to bondholders, you're kind of avoiding having to increase this distortionary tax too much. They were looking at taxing labor income basically. So, you could see how this might be politically expedient. I think that's a big a big reason for why governments do this. But but actually if you sort of put on your normative economics hat and you think about is this a good idea? Some economists have argued that maybe it is actually. And maybe we can talk about this later, but if you if you think about what happened during COVID I think this is probably a good lens to to use when you look at what happened during COVID. COVID was a lot like a war. This is by the way a point that others have made. Tom Sargent and George Hall have a number of papers

[00:16:19] where they make this this sort of this point that where they draw this analogy and I think it's a very useful one. I just want to kind of take us from so we started at kind of the Civil War. During World War I in Europe there was a lot of financial repression going off the gold standard, going back on the gold standard. It was a total disaster. I I've read, you know, a book or two about how like wealthy people who in Britain who owned a ton of bonds that got totally wiped out during World War I. In World War II the the Germans did all sorts of repression particularly like suppressing the purchases of consumer goods so that they would invest heavily into the military. But normally, you know, Hanno, I think we we live in a world where particularly people who have the important jobs, they would they might say, "Okay, financial repression is a thing of the past. We had it during all these wars." But there was this hero named Paul Volcker who in 1981 you know, the late 1970s or early 1980s raised interest rates and we have this great thing called Central Bank

[00:17:19] Independence. Financial repression is no more and the other hero to whom you you you referenced, Marriner Eccles, who restored the Federal Reserve's independence in the early 1950s, that's the Federal Reserve building is literally named after him in Washington, D.C. So, this is the kind of the narrative we've been told. I'm not saying that this narrative is nonsense, it's just a little bit more complicated. We'll get into it. And I think so far the forms of financial repression we have so far described of incentivizing banks basically to hold government debt and penalizing them if they don't hold debt or suppressing the consumer or the Central Bank literally funding the government as the U.S. Federal Reserve did during World War II, that is stuff that so far, you know, we we're not too far in our conversation and we you have uh quite quickly summarized and I think people can wrap their heads around it. Of course, there are very long papers written about it, but people can wrap their heads around. I think what could be called the financial repression of today, at least in some form, particularly with Central Banks, is a lot more hard to understand and we've

[00:18:22] talked about the West, America and and a little bit Europe. We will be returning to America and U.S. financial repression, the Federal Reserve, later in the conversation, but first let's we have to travel East. You have written several papers about financial repression in Japan and fiscal sustainability of the government. Can't fund itself, the government is ridiculously indebted. Government debt in Japan is well over 200% of GDP and many well-respected economists and famous economists, you know, some of whom I've interviewed, have said this is going to be a disaster. Japan is far too indebted. There's going to be a debt crisis in Japan and perhaps in other developed economies. So, it's no no surprise to people that has not yet happened and therefore people who challenge those famous economists say those people are wrong and the fact that Japan has had such a large burden of debt for so long with such low interest rates proves that, you know, the Ken Rogoffs of the world are are wrong. You've done a lot of important work with your co-authors that uh uh shine new light on this work and

[00:19:23] you come at it from a different angle and I think that it's really important. So, so I've kind of set the stage for you and now take it away. So, I think Japan is is is a really important country to study. And and sort of just by way of background, the way I got drawn into this is is because whenever I would talk about fiscal sustainability, you know, I I travel around the country and and give seminars on this topic, I would always get the same question somewhere halfway through the seminar, some somebody would raise his or her hand and say, "Okay, Hanno, you're saying fiscal sustainability is a big deal, but what about Japan?" And the implication was, as you hinted at, "Look, why are you getting so worked up about this? There There's a an advanced economy that has borrowed more than two times its GDP, if you add central and local government, and they're doing just fine. They have not had a major

[00:20:25] fiscal crisis and to be honest, initially I didn't quite know how to handle this question because I didn't know much about Japan. But eventually I decided I'd better have an intelligent answer to this question and so I teamed up with with two of my co-authors, SeHyoun Lee Chan and Hal Cole, and we started digging into digging into the data. And what we realized was that this was really an interesting exercise in financial engineering and financial repression by the Japanese government. And so, when economists sort of casually cited this as an example of oh well, you don't have to worry about high debt to GDP ratios, I think they they kind of overlooked what Japan is really been up to.

[00:21:25] And and so let me give sort of a the the gist of what Japan is doing. So, in order to understand what's going on in Japan, you can't just look at the central local government because if you do that, you you kind of >> [snorts] >> you hit a wall. It's a big puzzle because the central government's been running primary deficits before interest of around 5% of GDP for a couple decades. So, primary deficit that means that the amount of money that the government is short, the difference between how much it collects in taxes and how much it spends more than it collects in taxes and that's some is 5% of the total GDP of the country. And sorry, and that number is before the cost of interest payments of total debt. Exactly. It's importantly spending does not include your interest expenses. Yes, that that number has been roughly 5% of GDP, which is a humongous number if you if you keep that up for for 20 30 years.

[00:22:27] That's how you end up with a debt to GDP ratio well over 200% especially if your economy is not really growing which has been the case in Japan. So, if if you're just looking at the central local government and you only look at the liability side of debt, it's really hard to make progress in understanding this especially because Japan is not in the sort of magical region of the parameter space that I talked about earlier where its cost of funding is lower than the growth rate. It it is not because actually the real growth rate of Japan is zero, essentially, and the nominal growth rate is close to that because there's hardly been any inflation. And and the government's cost of funding turns out to be quite a bit higher than zero. It's low, but it's not that low. It's about 100 basis points per annum more, at least. So, it's not in this magical R lower than G region. And so, you look at this and you're like, "What is going on? We'd like to understand this." And so,

[00:23:27] >> what what was the puzzle that you present you know, when you say "What is going on?" Why were you confused? Can you just explain that? Well, so so standard standard theories of the valuation of government debt would predict that if you if you keep doing this and you keep running deficits um then one of two things would have to happen. Either you you actually see a lot of inflation. That's what most people would probably anticipated. The government is just issuing tons of IOUs that are not backed by surpluses. And then there's there's sort of something called the fiscal theory of the price level that says, "Well, the way that usually resolves itself is is we're going to devalue these securities by having inflation." If the government spends a bunch of money and that causes

[00:24:28] inflation to go to 6% and the 10-year yield is at 3%, the 10-year government bond yield, it it doesn't make any sense. Investors are losing 3% on real terms. So, they might sell the 10-year and the yield might go up to 6% or even higher, perhaps. Yes, the yields can do some of the work here, right? Because long-term yields can go up, and so the market value of debt issued by the Japanese government would be marked down dramatically to reflect the fact that there aren't any surpluses backing these claims. That's what you'd expect to happen. That really didn't happen and we can we can talk more about about that in a in a second. The other thing you might expect is maybe at some point the the Japanese government actually gets into serious fiscal trouble and considers defaulting on part of its IOU's and that hasn't happened either. Now, an important detail here is is that uh yields on government debt were

[00:25:29] extremely low. And and that's partly because, and this links it back to what we were talking about before, that's partly because uh the Bank of Japan was implementing yield curve control, very much akin to what the Fed was doing during the Second World War. They said, "Look, we're going to cap the 10-year yield on Japanese government bonds at 50 basis points and we stand ready to buy as many bonds as we have to in order to enforce that cap." And boy, did they have to buy bonds. They bought over the past decade or so, they bought more than issuance. So, they literally took everything that the Japanese Treasury was issuing and then some, which is remarkable because I just told you that they were issuing a lot of bonds because they were running primary deficits of 5% of GDP. So, So, they bought the Bank of Japan, Japanese Central Bank, bought

[00:26:29] over 100% of the government of Japan's issuance. If you exclude short-dated securities, T-bills, they bought more than 100% of issuance over throughout an entire decade, which is truly stunning. And and so, by the way, this is kind of something that's often overlooked, it it essentially kind of really hampered the functioning of the Japanese bond market. There were days until a few years ago where the benchmark 10-year bond wouldn't actually trade. There was basically no trade. So, this this is kind of an important thing to realize because often central bankers will say, "Well, we had to start large-scale asset purchases because the bond market was not functioning." Well, actually the evidence we have from Japan suggests that really aggressive large-scale asset

[00:27:29] purchases don't particularly help price discovery in the bond market. In fact, they really hamper it, which is what you'd expect, right? If there is one large inelastic, price-insensitive buyer that starts to buy up all of the issuance, how could that possibly improve price discovery? I've never heard anyone explain that to me. I think I think that's basically the wrong way to look at things. But so, anyway, that that's sort of the the puzzle. Why hasn't there been a serious fiscal crisis? Why hasn't there been inflation in in Japan? And and that's the question that we were trying to answer. And in order to to answer that question, what we said was, "Maybe it's not enough to just look at the Japanese central government in isolation, but maybe we have to look at the bigger picture." And what I mean by that is the following. What you can do is ultimately, you can

[00:28:31] think of the central bank, the the treasury of the central government, and maybe some publicly owned financial institutions, the public pension fund, you You think of them as all being subject to one government budget constraint, really. The public sector, call it the public sector in Japan. And we said, well, the right way to look at this is probably just to consolidate everything. So, the equivalent in the US would be you consolidate the Treasury and the Fed. Here, we're consolidating the Japanese Treasury, the Bank of Japan, the public pension fund, which is huge, and some publicly owned financial institutions, including the Postal Savings Bank, which was largest bank in the world until maybe 10 or 15 years ago. So, that's what we do. Okay, and then we realized what was going on. We had this aha moment, which was super exciting. And this is a very simple exercise, by

[00:29:31] the way. This is just accounting. And and and all all we did was download a couple of spreadsheets, the flow of funds of Japan. And we realized that what what was going on was that the Japanese public sector was funding itself, first of all, at very low interest rates, below market rates. And we can talk more about how they did that, but that's obviously related to what the Bank of Japan was doing in the background. So, we'll we'll come to that in a second. But then, and this is the key, they were turning around and investing some of these borrowed funds in risky assets, equities, through the pension fund. They were investing abroad. They were investing in in long-dated bonds abroad, as well. And so, really, what they were doing is kind of a classic carry trade. That's probably the word people would use on

[00:30:32] Wall Street to describe this. You're funding yourself at floating rates, and then you turn around and invest in long-dated assets, taking on duration risk, interest rate risk, and currency risk. So, the Japanese public sector was doing a massive carry trade. And that one has been extremely profitable for them. So, if you look at the last decade or so, they harvested [clears throat] excess returns above their cost of funding on these risky investments of around 6% of GDP. So, just massively profitable, but of course very risky. Right? You're taking on a lot of risk. So, that's in a nutshell what was going on. What we'd been missing is we just were looking at the liability side, and we didn't realize, and I think we were the first to point this out, that the Japanese public sector was really

[00:31:34] doing this massive carry trade and trying to harvest these excess returns, sort of similar to what a highly leveraged hedge fund would do. And and that they've been quite successful in doing that, but of course, that comes at the cost of exposing themselves to a lot of interest rate risk, and maybe we can talk more about that in a second. And we should probably also talk more about how exactly they managed to lower their cost of funding so so dramatically, because that's the key [clears throat] to why they managed to pull this off. I hope you're enjoying today's episode. Global macro investing is in a renaissance. That's because the world is changing faster than ever, with higher interest rates, rising global tensions, and AI uncertainty representing just a few of the mounting obstacles for traditional 60/40 portfolios. Uncorrelated global macro strategies can offer a powerful tool to help capitalize on economic shifts. But historically, traditional alternative investments have been an exclusive club where access is limited,

[00:32:35] and so is the information shared on the portfolio holdings. Not anymore. Enter HFGM, the Unlimited HFGM Global Macro ETF. Unlimited uses a proprietary algorithm to analyze public data from the world's largest global macro managers to construct a dynamic portfolio of liquid holdings. The strategy aims to capture those global macro returns while targeting a volatility level designed to make a meaningful impact on your portfolio. HFGM delivers exposure to the broader global macro sector without the burden of typical LP structure headaches. That means no high minimums, no locked-up capital, no K-1 tax forms, and significantly less fee drag as well. But, the biggest advantage is radical transparency. While traditional alternatives hide their strategies behind closed doors and opaque reporting, HFGM lets you look under the hood every single day. How a strategy should work is one thing, but the big question is, does it perform? Well, HFGM is the number one Morningstar rated fund in their US macro trading category since its launch last April. We

[00:33:36] wish we could go into all the details of that performance right now, but navigating the regulations makes that a challenge in a podcast format. But, unlike private global macro funds, you can see for yourself. Don't take our word for it. Go to unlimitedetfs.com/hfmg to see their transparent daily positioning and full performance track record. If you want access to a diversifying strategy created by an experienced CIO at a fraction of the typical 2 and 20 cost, check out what Bob Elliott and his team at Unlimited developed. That's unlimitedetfs.com/hfmg to learn more. Past performance is not indicative of future results. An investment should not be made based solely on returns. Before investing, you should carefully consider the fund's investment objectives, risks, charges, and expenses. This and other information is in the prospectus. Please read the prospectus carefully before you invest, which can be found on unlimitedetfs.com/hfmg. Distributed by Foreside Fund Services LLC. Thanks for listening. Let's get back to today's interview. So, a carry trade is borrowing at, let's say, 4% to invest in securities that yield, let's say, 10%. The securities could yield 10% either because you're taking on duration risk, you're buying longer dated

[00:34:36] securities, you're taking on securities that have a greater credit risk, or currency risk, or equity risk. The what securities were in the the assets? You have this chart that is quite complex of the Bank of Japan plus the public the plus the government. What is an asset on the top of the chart above the axis, and then below the axis, which is their liabilities. So, the main assets of the public sector in Japan are risky assets including equities, foreign securities that are purchased by the Japanese public pension funds. They're also on the asset side some loans, loans that are issued by the publicly owned financial institutions. So, those are kind of the the big categories, and so the Japanese public sector invests abroad, invests in the stock market, and it it sort of wants to earn the equity

[00:35:37] premium, it wants to earn a currency risk premium. It's doing a currency carry trade, so just to make sure your listeners follow this. A currency carry trade is is whenever you borrow in a low interest rate currency like the yen, and that's exactly what the public sector does in Japan, and then go invest abroad in higher interest rate currencies. And so, the the Japanese public sector is arguably the largest currency carry trader in the world. By the way, almost any macro quant hedge fund will do some of this. This is a classic trade, the currency carry trade, and you know, standard economics says it shouldn't work because It's efficient. Yeah, it it it it sort of the high interest rate currency should depreciate against the low interest rate currency, so you're never going to be able to make money this way. It turns out that in the real world you do. There's a good reason for it actually, and this is something I've I've done

[00:36:37] some early work on, which which is it's really risky. In bad times of high volatility in global financial markets, you'll get hammered if you do this. So, this is not a free lunch. You're really picking up the proverbial penny in front of the steamroller, and when there's a global financial crisis, you'll get hit by the steamroller. So, but that is what the Japanese public sector does on the asset side, exposing themselves to a lot of risk. Now, the key the key to to this piece of financial engineering magic is they have to keep their funding costs low, right? How do they do that? Well, this is where we go back to what the Bank of Japan has done. So, what has the Bank of Japan done? The Bank of Japan has and and this is kind of an amazing number. It has essentially bought back one GDP of long-dated bonds, think 10-year government bonds, one GDP, and issued reserves. Okay, so

[00:37:41] mechanically, how this works is well, suppose that the Bank of Japan buys a couple of million yen in bonds from a particular bank, let's say Mizuho Bank. Then what happens is it wires a couple of million into the bank account that Mizuho Bank has at the Bank of Japan. So, it creates digital money that is wired into the account of that bank at the Bank of Japan. Now, what does that mean for the public sector if you consolidate everything? Well, essentially what the Japanese public sector is doing, it's not borrowing, it's not funding itself by issuing bonds anymore. It's actually funding itself by issuing reserves. And reserves, they do earn an interest rate. So, it's not Mizuho might earn an interest rate, but that interest rate is

[00:38:42] set by the Bank of Japan. It's not a market rate. It's in fact the policy rate of the Bank of Japan. And interestingly, without getting into the nitty-gritty institutional details, the Bank of Japan has different tiers for these reserves, but for the most part, they've earned zero interest rate. So, essentially, the public sector was funding itself by issuing reserves at a rate close to zero for well over a decade. So, so that's sort of the magic. You you fund yourself at below market rates with the Bank of Japan lending a hand there. And then you turn around and you make these risky investments through the pension fund mainly and you harvest large excess returns.

[00:39:46] That's kind of the way the Bank of Japan has been helping the government in keeping the government funded. Does that make sense? I think so. So, the Bank of Japan policy rate is now 0.75%, the highest level since 1995. Even though that actually is low, it's it's high for Japan. But since this policy has been it's been even lower than 0.75%. You're saying that one of the most indebted governments on earth has been able to borrow money at effectively negative interest rates so people pay them to borrow and so they they can buy Nvidia, Apple, LVMH, all all global risky securities. That's essentially uh what's been happening. Now, as you as you point out um the wheels are coming off this experiment because yields in Japan have been increasing. So

[00:40:50] so just sort of to backtrack what the government did roughly 2 years ago is it says we're going to we're done with yield curve control and the reason it made that call is is because inflation actually took off in Japan. Japan has been seeing inflation well in excess of 2%. And so as a result of that the Bank of Japan felt compelled to end its policy of yield curve control. So it's no longer enforcing that 50 basis point cap on the 10-year yield that I was talking about earlier. Having said that the Bank of Japan is still buying massive amounts of Japanese government bonds, right? So which is a bit puzzling if you were sort of a a real believer and sort of standard new Keynesian orthodoxy and you thought that the only reason the Bank of Japan had been

[00:41:52] engaged in large-scale asset purchases is because well, they were at the zero lower bound, nominal the short nominal rate was at zero, there was the threat of deflation. Well, that's all been that's all been solved so to speak but they're still buying bonds. That suggests that maybe that's way of looking at what the Bank of Japan's been doing is is missing at least part of the motivation for why the Bank of Japan was doing these massive large-scale asset purchases and and actually maybe we can talk about that a little bit more because I think that's an important point. I think really what's been going on is that the Bank of Japan was doing this in order to make sure that the government had a cheap source of funding and they wouldn't end up in fiscal trouble. And to to their credit, that has been partly successful if that was their objective.

[00:42:53] But I think with inflation taking off in the past few years, they were now forced to retreat from this policy at least partly and that leaves them in a very precarious position because what I emphasized when I explained what they're doing is they're exposing themselves to massive amounts of interest rate risk, right? Think about the following scenario. Suppose that you you borrow at the floating rate and then you invest in long-dated bonds. Well, when short rates start to increase, you're going to get hammered. You're going to suffer a capital loss on your investment and now you have to finance yourself at a higher interest rate. That's why the carry trade makes you money, it's risky. When rates go up, you're going to get hammered. So, you talked about how the the strategy of basically running a a leveraged carry trade as the Japanese

[00:43:55] public sector has been doing for 10 years now or perhaps perhaps even more has from 2013 to 2023 generated an average net return of 6.25% of GDP. You referenced that number earlier. In the paper, you also say that the excess rate of return was 4.66% above its funding cost. So, those are the numbers, but can you just explain the consequences of that carry trade? The Bank of Japan, the public sector made a gazillion dollars from that. That That is a indefinite phrase, but you know, we're we're probably talking hundreds of billions, trillions. I mean, Japanese GDP in yen is 2/3 of a quadrillion in in yen. So, they made a lot of money from that. What are the consequences of that? How did it How did it shore up, if at all, the government finances? You know, when the government makes money, what are the consequences of that? And then for the Japanese population, who

[00:44:56] benefits? Who is perhaps hurt? So, this this a great This a great question and and it really gets to the heart of why we haven't seen a fiscal crisis. Because the government was harvesting these large excess returns on its risky investments, the net liability of the public sector hasn't grown nearly as much as just the liabilities. Because So, think about it. The net liability is the size of your liability minus the size of your assets. And these assets, they were growing faster because they were realizing a much higher rate of return because they're very risky. The liability side wasn't growing as fast even though they were running big deficits because the cost of funding was low. And so, if you look at the net, the difference, the net liability, that actually, over the past 10 years, went down a bit. And so, they If you look at the numbers, you'll see that the the net

[00:45:57] liabilities, as a fraction of GDP, have actually stabilized over the past decade, even though debt itself, gross debt, had grown a lot. And so, that's our explanation for why Japan, until recently, had not seen a fiscal crisis. You have to look at the asset side as well and and and realize that the public sector has all these risky investments. So, that's that's sort of the answer to the first part of of your question. The second part is is a really interesting one. So, if you're trained as an economist, then your immediate reaction is, well, who's paying for all this? Surely, somebody is, right? You can't just conjure capital from thin air. Someone has to You know such thing as a free lunch. And so, there is a cost to financial repression and and it is a tax, actually, on whoever's holding government IOUs.

[00:46:57] And we try and compute the size of that tax using sort of standard finance. We sort of say, look, you know, if you look at the public sector's balance sheet, then on the asset side, you have their risky investments, right? Uh and then you have the stream of surpluses that at some point maybe the government will produce. That's the asset side and then on liability side, there's all the different types of liabilities that the public sector has issued, including government bonds, but also reserves held in the Bank of Japan, which is what I just talked about. And then we sort of say, look, using standard finance, you'd have to argue that the riskiness of the left-hand side has to match the riskiness of the right-hand side. And so, basically, what you're saying is, look, if you buy these IOUs issued by the Japanese public sector, you should be compensated for all the risk. I've just told you that there's a lot of risk on the left-hand side. Uh so, you you'd want to be compensated for it. That's sort of basic, right? That's the

[00:47:58] the basic principle of finance. Yes, I would be willing to hold a riskier asset in my portfolio, but only if you'll compensate me for it. Well, turns out Japanese investors who bought IOUs issued by the government are not really compensated for it, or at least they're under-compensated, and we we think up up to 200 basis points is the gap. Interestingly, if you recompute that 6.25% of GDP number with the government's cost of funding being 200 basis points higher, most of that's gone. You And you might think, "Wait, how can that happen?" Well, remember the liability side's much bigger than the asset side. And so, if you increase the government's cost of funding by 200 basis points, that's enough to wipe out most of the the profits, so to speak. They're not really profits,

[00:48:59] excess returns, Yes. that the public sector realizes on on its balance sheet. Okay, so it's a tax on savers. That's kind of the the basic insight, but then, you know, there's an interesting question about well, who's really bearing the brunt of it? And And the burden's not shared equally. It turns out, and this is kind of I think almost always the case, that financial repression is a regressive tax. It's mainly a tax on less sophisticated investors. Why is that? Well, most Japanese households, 67%, uh are not participating in asset markets. They don't hold stocks, mutual funds, bonds, anything like that. The only financial asset they have is a uh deposit at a bank, basically. And so,

[00:50:01] they're the real victims here because as the Bank of Japan was pushing down rates lower and lower, they don't see any capital gains. Uh they just earn less and less in interest. And imagine imagine saving and trying to accumulate wealth when you're in a deposit in a Japanese your money's parked in a Japanese deposit and and you're earning a real rate that's probably close to zero. It's very hard to accumulate wealth that way. How big are the deposits as a fraction of GDP? Well, about three times as big as in the US. So, the number is In nominal terms, not in percentage terms. So, no. As Well, as a fraction >> in percentage terms? In percentage terms, yeah. So, as a fraction of GDP, it's roughly 180% close to 190% of GDP in Japan. That's a humongous number, by the way. In the US, that number in 2023 was

[00:51:04] roughly a third, maybe 60% or so. So, your typical Japanese household saves in a bank deposit, especially if they're not that financially sophisticated, and financial sophistication is very much correlated with wealth. So, and so, typically that also means less wealthy. So, young, less financially sophisticated, poorer Japanese households, they're stuck in deposits, and they've been earning real rates of return that are probably below zero for decades. So, it's a very regressive tax. Now Now, you your listeners might think, wait a minute, if it's a very regressive tax in an advanced economy, most governments don't like regressive taxes. Surely the electorate would object to that, but the electorate doesn't understand. Yeah. A typical Japanese depositor is not aware of the fact that she's being taxed

[00:52:07] in this particular way. In fact, most economists don't even wouldn't even agree with me on this particular issue, by the way. So, that that is part of the problem. And financial repression is a very appealing tax because the people who are being taxed actually don't know they're being taxed. And because it's all super complicated and you need to have at least a solid understanding of economics to even begin to understand what's going on. And it's like a lot of things in economics or statistics, quite hard to prove as a you know, as opposed to you know, we can prove gravity, we see it every day. Absolutely. Chemistry, the 99.99 almost infinite percentage of the time things have the exact same reaction every single time. We live this life only once. You only walk through the same river river once, right? Heraclitus. So, we we there's no way to know. Even though you're probably right and I think you're right, like it's it's probably not Yeah. Yes, that we have to as as a

[00:53:09] financial economist and a macroeconomist, we have to humbly accept the fact that there's a huge amount of model uncertainty. We don't know what the right model is of the world and and and that's because as you pointed out, you know, it's very hard to run experiments in macroeconomics. We can't really do that. We only see the one history that that's actually happened. And then we try and tell stories about it that are compelling and we do that with math as economists, but but still that doesn't really mean that what we're saying is absolutely right. And And certainly there's it's hard to come up with smoking gun evidence. That's absolutely correct. So you you say so a a progressive tax it would be something where you tax people the higher they have an income or wealth they pay more in taxes as a percentage. A regressive tax would be something like a tax on

[00:54:11] smoking or gas where everyone whether regards if if you you know are unemployed and have no money or making no money or if you're a billionaire you pay the same rate. So as a percentage of your income it's extremely high for very low income people and for billionaires it's effectively not a tax at all. It's effectively zero as a percentage. Okay. So you say that the the the carry trade that Japan has been involved in particularly the fact that risk-free rates are 200 basis points roughly lower than where they should be that is regressive in that it impacts people the lower income the most, the younger people the most, the least financially sophisticated the most, the lowest wealth the most. I understand the point about financial sophistication because if you're living in a world where interest rates are zero and the you know price to earnings ratio of the Japanese stock market is is quite low generally financially sophisticated people will you know have a lower percentage in in cash or deposits in a higher percentage

[00:55:11] in risky assets. I understand that but isn't it also true that almost by definition the the poorest people in a country are have a net wealth very close to zero if not actually negative. So wouldn't it actually in a financial repression world of interest rates be zero doesn't that actually help bar you by definition helps borrowers the most? Aren't the poorest and lowest income in a country, aren't they some perhaps the greater net borrowers than super rich people who I'm sure, you know, if you have tons of money, you can get involved in private equity deals that have very high RRRs when borrowing at close to zero rates to invest in in, you know, higher yielding securities and and businesses. But, you know, if you if you're a multi-millionaire, you you have a lot of cash you'll you'll be laying around you you laying around, right? Yes, so so so that's a great question. And

[00:56:12] yeah, the basic idea is that if you're not that financially sophisticated, basically all you know about is deposits. You've you you don't know anyone around you who's invested in stocks or bonds, and and so that's just not an option and you're basically trapped in in deposits, right? Now, your point is a really interesting one. You're saying, "Wait a minute, Hannah, what if what if they're actually just these these really poor people are are borrowing? Isn't isn't isn't it appealing then to live in this environment where rates are going down?" So, a couple of points, so we we try to sort of address that in our work. So, one is for for a typical young household, what you're trying to do is you're trying to accumulate some wealth so that when you retire, uh you have some extra savings that you can dig into in order to fund whatever part of your consumption is is not already funded by

[00:57:13] your um retirement income, say from a social security pension plan, for example. And it's going to be awfully hard to save enough at very low rates. Now, coming back to the borrowing, actually, I tend to think, and the evidence I think is sort of supportive of that, that by and large environments where you push rates lower are actually very good for very sophisticated investors who have access to a lot of leverage. So, let me give you an example from the housing market actually because I think that's sort of a good way to illustrate it. So, if you think about housing you might say, "Oh, it's really helpful to push down interest rates because if you're a young household and you want to buy a home now your mortgage costs will be lower." I've often heard that argument. Central bankers actually use that argument and I think that's the way they think about it.

[00:58:13] Now there's a big caveat there >> [laughter] >> which is that when people reason this way, they hold the price of the asset constant. They think of the house price as fixed. Now, of course, that's completely wrong. The house price will not be fixed. In fact, we ran that experiment in the US in the pandemic when the Fed, for whatever reason, nobody's ever been able to articulate to me exactly why they did it, but they decided to go ahead and buy a ton of mortgage-backed securities. They pushed mortgage rates down and I'm very grateful for that because I was able to refinance, but maybe we can talk about that later. >> Financial stability, people benefiting that is an example. Yes. >> Yes. Well, actually that is that is another way of of illustrating this this fact that these things tend not to benefit the people that they're they're maybe targeting. What happened in the US? Well, house prices skyrocketed and actually what happened was the exact opposite. Housing did not become more affordable. If you were to to Suppose that you

[00:59:14] wanted to buy, I ran these numbers, the median house in the US during the pandemic, even when the Fed was in the business of buying all these mortgage-backed securities, artificially suppressing mortgage rates, actually your monthly mortgage bill would have been ticking up if if you look at a a hypothetical new home buyer. The other thing is, not only that, your monthly mortgage bill was going up, your down payment was going up, right? So, you needed a much bigger down payment. So, unless your mom and your dad had some cash lying around, basically you were you were priced out of the market because you you just didn't have enough cash to even buy to do afford the down payments and and and get the mortgage. So, what ended up happening, and this is this is why I'm telling this long convoluted story, institutional investors entered the residential housing market in massive numbers. Why? Well, because they're private

[01:00:14] equity funds, etc., who are in the business of deploying leverage. That is what they're good at. They're good at getting a lot of leverage at great rates, and then deploying it. And they did it in an environment where a lot of households weren't even able to borrow at these low rates. So, I think the key caveat to your earlier point is isn't aren't these low rate environments good for borrowers? I'd say typically not because borrowers, your typical borrower is going to run into binding constraints very quickly, especially in the housing market, because you're you're basically pushing up the price of the underlying asset that they're trying to buy dramatically. And so, by and large, I think that low rate environments have been great for investors like private equity funds who deploy a lot of leverage, right? You you borrow at the

[01:01:15] short rate, you buy long-dated assets, a little bit like the Japanese public sector, actually. And as rates go down, valuation ratios go up, you've invested with leverage, and you get a nice tailwind, and things sort of work out. So, I just want to press on this just a little bit. I'm going to say I've got two premise premises, and then I've got a conclusion. And when I get your response, you tell me if you think my two premises are fair. Number one, let's say that folks at the bottom end of the wealth spectrum have a net assets of close to zero, or or perhaps negative. And then at the super end of the very, very wealthy, you have seen these pie charts on the financial channels of what what their portfolio looks like, and it's maybe 30% private equity, 5% hedge funds, 30% stocks,

[01:02:16] credit, and stuff. And so obviously, by definition, these very wealthy people have a ton of assets, and a decent percentage of that, not anywhere close to 50%, but some percentage of that, is in short duration securities, whether it is literally cash, or they're allocating to private credit, which has floating rate liabilities. So, my my premise number two is Premise number one is what I said earlier. Premise two is that of the super wealthy, that optically, they are long cash and very long cash and floating rate securities way more than the lower end, who we said have very, very low wealth. However, my question is, is it Are you doing consolidation? If I were to do the consolidation of Are you saying that the private equity that they owned is so leveraged? Like if they own CLO equity, or if they own leveraged companies, if you deconsolidate that, they actually are a net borrower, not a net lender, even though they have, you know, millions and millions of cash and

[01:03:18] cash like securities. So, we we've actually tried to do just that for the US. We what we tried to do was exactly what you're trying to get at. We wanted to come up with a chart where on the horizontal axis you have percentiles the wealth distribution for Americans and then on the vertical axis we have the duration of your portfolio. That's basically what we tried to do. And we do this in a paper called wealth inequality in a world with declining interest rates. I think that's roughly the title. I think I might have changed it a little bit on the way. Yeah. And so what we So, this is exactly what we tried to do. And what you see there, which I think is super interesting, is that duration is very low for the poorest households, but we start with households who have net wealth that is slightly positive, but tiny, okay? For reasons we can talk about later. And then And then it's the duration starts to go up a little bit

[01:04:18] for the middle class because they buy homes and they have fixed rate mortgages. That means that you have at least some duration in your financial portfolio. But what you really see is that when you get into the top decile, that's when you see duration really pick up. And the reason is, and you were hinting at this, is that these the richest Americans invest in private businesses. In fact, that's why a lot of them are in the top decile is because they had a successful private business and that could be either you know, a medical practice or a You could be a dentist, but but you could also be a successful entrepreneur. And and a private business or any other company has duration built into it, right? Because you're buying a claim to a growing cash flow stream and and so a lot of these cash flows are far off in the distant future and so that has a lot of duration in it. So, why am I belaboring this point? Well, now sort of

[01:05:18] let's run the following thought experiment. If suppose I lowered the real rate of return on all assets or the required real rate of return by 100 basis points, well, given what I've just told you about their portfolios, I know that I'm going to make the right tail of the wealth distribution fatter. Wealth is going to go up more for the richest households. And and and it's not going to go up a whole lot for the poorest ones. Why not for the poorest ones? Well, let's think about it. The poorest Americans, they're like the poor Japanese households. They're they're saving in deposits if they're saving. >> [snorts] >> And so, when you lower real rates, there's no capital gain. They have no duration, basically, right? The duration of a of a deposit is between 0 and 1 years if you want to put a number on it. In the middle the middle class, their wealth does go up a bit, but in

[01:06:20] percentage terms, it goes up less than the capital gains that are recorded by the top decile, in particular the top 1%. That's where most of the duration is concentrated. So, so so so actually, what we argue in our work is that that is kind of the key to understanding the increase in wealth inequality between 1980 and 2020. It's actually mostly that. It's the fact that real rates went way down. Long-dated assets saw big capital gains. Why? Well, that's just basic finance. If you're discounting cash flows at a lower rate, the value of the asset goes up. And those assets are owned mostly by the wealthiest Americans. So, that's basically the mechanism. It's a very simple mechanism. But, it's quite different from the story that other economists like Piketty have

[01:07:21] told. We So, we we actually think that wealth inequality went way up in the US because expected rates of return went way down. Which is a way of saying when expected rates of returns go down, that's a way of saying that asset prices went up, which by definition helps very wealthy people. That's basically it. But, it doesn't help the poor because they don't own And by the way, I'm not saying it it it doesn't help the poor and it's because of the composition of the portfolio of the poor. The poor have mostly deposits in their portfolio and they don't see capital gains because they don't have duration. I'm So, it's not quite a tautology because I Often when I say this, people say, "Ah, he's just saying that the poor have no wealth." And that No, that's that's actually not what I'm saying. In fact, think of a a counterfactual experiment. Suppose that all Americans had the same portfolio composition. So, we keep the wealth distribution the way it is in the data, but now let's make sure everyone has the same portfolio. Now, I run the

[01:08:23] same experiment. I pull down expected rates of return by 100 basis points. What's going to happen to wealth inequality? Nothing. Absolutely nothing. It's just going to stay fixed. By the way, if you look at a graph, maybe you can link to this graph later. If you look at a chart that plots wealth inequality and real interest rates in the US in the post-war era, they track each other beautifully. So, between 1980 and 2020, real interest rates went way down. Wealth inequality went straight up. And the way we measure wealth inequality is just look at total wealth owned by the top decile relative to total wealth in the US economy. Prior to 1980, real interest rates were going way up and wealth inequality was going way down. So, I think understanding who has interest rate exposure is really important if you're trying to understand wealth inequality. And wealth inequality

[01:09:25] magically goes down whenever there's a recession or a financial crisis. So, it would seem, oh, what do we need to do? We need to do exactly what we did in 2007 and exactly what we did in 2001 and and it's, you know, clearly not. So, it's an artificially good outcome when you have a recession and you know, that is a fake good outcome. And actually, if you are extremely worried about wealth inequality, then there's good news for you, which is we're compressing the wealth distribution as we speak. Real interest rates have been going up since 2022 quite a bit and that is finally starting to show up in valuations of lots of different risky assets, I think. And as that happens, of course, it's the same mechanism that we've been talking about in reverse, right? I'm just sort of reversing everything. The fraction owned by the top decile of all US wealth is going to go down inevitably. And I think we're already seeing that

[01:10:25] happen. Your chart of the consolidated Japanese government balance sheet. At first, it confused me because it's shows that they are massively short bonds and T-bills, but then I realized that's just saying that the Bank of Japan, sure, owns a ton of Japanese government bonds, but they don't own as much Japanese government bonds as the government of Japan is net short them. So, that's what's there. What is the loans that the consolidated public sector in Japan owns. The loans do they own? You're talking about the loans on the asset side of the public sector. Yes. Yes, those are mostly loans made by publicly owned financial institutions. So, there's quite a few publicly owned financial institutions, so banks that are essentially government owned in Japan, and they make loans, so they show up they would show up on that side of the ledger. One example of a big

[01:11:27] Japanese financial institution that used to be owned by the government was the Postal Savings Bank, and it was the largest bank in the world. And that one's kind of an interesting one, and I was waiting for an opportunity to talk about it because almost every Japanese household had an account with the Postal Savings Bank. And that was actually a great deal for the government. Why? Because the Postal Savings Bank was basically required to fund this thing called the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, or FILP, and that was basically the government. It was It was a government-run program that financed infrastructure investments, so you know, bridges, roads, etc. So, basically, the Japanese government was using the Postal Savings Bank to fund a lot of its investments. Now,

[01:12:28] what happened was that in the late '90s, the Japanese government said, "You know what? We we can't keep doing this. We're going to liberalize the capital market, and we're going to stop this way of getting access to cheap funding." But what they then did is they quickly assured that they had another source of cheap funding through the Bank of Japan. So, what they kind of did, which I think was was kind of very ingenious, is they replaced sort of a old-school way of financial repression with a uh slightly harder to detect, more market-friendly form of financial repression. So, instead of the government funding itself by forcing depositors to invest in their bonds, they kind of said, or they kind of forced the Bank of Japan in some ways to buy its bonds, thus also assuring themselves of another source of cheap

[01:13:29] funding. But, of course, usually when we talk about large-scale asset purchases, we don't use that language of financial repression. And so, it changes the conversation a bit, I think. It does. So, the loans historically were a large part of the assets, but really the increase from 2012 to 2023 in assets was in foreign securities, deposits, and uh then the the increase in liabilities was not where So, basically, the the liabilities went down of bonds and T-bills from 162% to 107%. Yeah, so bonds and T-bills went down for the consolidated public sector because what happens, let me explain that because that that might seem somewhat paradoxical or contradictory. So, basically, when the Bank of Japan, remember, they bought back one GDP of bonds, and they issued reserves instead. So, you see that purple area? That's

[01:14:30] growing to one GDP. So, they're replacing bonds with reserves. So, the consolidated government, if you put the Bank of Japan together with the government, the consolidated government is now funding itself through the Bank of Japan by having the Bank of Japan issue reserves. Because if you if the Bank of Japan buy buys back bonds, it now has bonds on its asset side, but the Treasury has bonds on its liability side. So, when I consolidate this, it drops out, and the only thing you're left with is the liability that's remains, which is bank reserves. The purpose >> I got it. Okay. I I finally understand this. Thank you. So, Yeah. consolidated public sector in Japan replaced a lot of its liabilities with bonds and T-bills, which if they have duration even with 0% interest rates, even they have a yield. They It's low, but they have a yield with literally

[01:15:30] free money of of bank reserves with a duration of zero, which have an interest rate of zero or perhaps negative. So, it's like for our bankers who listen, if you're a banker, you love non-interest-bearing deposits. You pay zero for them. Uh if you deposits, you still make money on them because you pay it, but you make a yield higher than that. But, the best thing in the world is non-interest-bearing deposits. This is basically saying the public sector in Japan replaced a lot of its interest-bearing deposits, even though they have some duration, what's called them CDs, the red bar, with the purple bar of bank reserves, non-interest-bearing deposits. So, That's That's a pretty good trade. Yeah. It's exactly. It's a good trade as long as the floating rate stays very low. Now, this goes back to one of the things we talked about before. The Bank of Japan has abandoned yield curve control when inflation took off 2 years ago. It has increased its policy rate, which is also the interest it pays on reserves, to 75 basis points, roughly speaking.

[01:16:31] And by the way, even at that very low rate, don't forget that there's 1 GDP of bank reserves. So, 75 basis points, well, that's a little unpleasant. All of a sudden you're already paying 0.75% of GDP, right? Now, imagine >> trillion dollars and in yen it's over 2/3 quadrillion, 670 trillion yen. I'm going to take your word for it because I I don't even know how to interpret those numbers, but they're big. And so, now assume that they increase the reference rate to 2 or 3% uh boy, this gets to be very unpleasant because now your funding costs go way up and then on the asset side, what tends to happen when real rates go up is that valuations go down. Oh, and the big one, we haven't talked about this yet. So, um a big a big part of the success was that they were investing in foreign currency abroad, right? So, foreign assets and they were not hedging currency risks, the public sector.

[01:17:33] Now, why has that worked out? Well, it turns out that when you're in the business of financial repression and you keep real rates artificially low at home, your currency depreciates. That's just basic economics. And and the the yen in real terms has depreciated massively against foreign currencies. Depending on the currency you're looking at between 40 and 50% maybe over the past uh couple of decades. But, if you're investing abroad, that's a massive tailwind, right? You get a nice extra couple of percent because the yen is just consistently depreciating or put differently, foreign currencies are appreciating against your home currency. Okay. And and so so that's that's been a massive tailwind for the Japanese public sector. Now, here's the interesting part. What you might be thinking, wait a minute, why doesn't everyone do that?

[01:18:35] Well, if you're not the Bank of Japan or or you're not in the public sector, but suppose that you're a private bank, >> [snorts] >> and most most investors are not retail investors are not sophisticated enough to be able to do this, but a bank could do it. Why can't they massively invest abroad? They have to hedge currency risk, right? A private bank cannot just leave all that currency risk unhedged. And here's the kicker. If you hedge currency risk because there is a without getting too technical, there's a deviation from something called covered interest rate parity, you essentially incur an additional tax of around, depending on the maturity, maybe even 100 basis points per annum. So, because there are these deviations from covered interest rate parity in hedging markets, essentially, Japan is levying a tax on capital that flows abroad, at least sophisticated capital.

[01:19:37] And that's a beautiful thing if you're in the business of financial repression because that helps trap the capital at home, which is, of course, the big challenge, right? Because your rates, I've been arguing that your real rates at home are artificially low, and so any economist will say, "Oh, no, come on. Why don't people just invest abroad?" Part of the answer is they're essentially taxing capital that flows abroad. And we can talk more about where that covered interest rate parity deviation comes from, but but it's it's a it's a big help if you're in the business of financial repression. >> We'll take your word for it that it it's it's a good help. So, this massive trade has been helped by the fact that interest rates were zero, so you borrow at zero to invest in higher yielding securities, and you're investing in other foreign currencies that have a different currency, you're benefiting from the fact that those currencies are strengthening against the yen. So, what happens if interest rates go up as they

[01:20:38] have been in Japan? And then what happens if the yen stops depreciating? Right. So, paradoxically, when they raise rates um and the yen starts to appreciate because now you're no longer artificially suppressing rates of return at home, that's inevitably going to make your currency more attractive to foreign investors, and so your currency will appreciate. That's bad news for the Japanese public sector because, remember, they still have this huge levered long position in foreign currency. And so, they're going to get hammered as a result of that. So, if the yen starts to massively appreciate, which I think is almost inevitable if they end financial repression, that that's going to mean big losses on their foreign investments. Unless, of course, in the meantime, they've decided to hedge some of this currency risk, but that's not something that I'd be that that I'm aware of.

[01:21:41] And what are the consequences of that? The public sector has been making tons of money Yes. >> from this carry trade. If the government starts to {quote} {unquote} lose money, the government, by which I mean the consolidated public sector, what does that mean? I mean, in America, the public sector has lost money. The Federal Reserve in 2020 bought trillions of securities yielding very, very low interest rates. Their mark-to-market value is lower, far lower than than where they were. And if you do the math, I don't know if this is still the case, but the the equity of the Federal Reserve, if it was mark-to-market, perhaps could be a a negative number. And yet, Hanno, here we are. I on on the East Coast, you on the West Coast. You know, the sun has risen. We we still we still The financial system still still works, but what are the consequences of that? Is it a little bit different? What's the end game here? Well, yeah, so so I'm I'm going to leave aside your your point about central banks and negative equity, but but it's an interesting one. So, maybe you can come back to that. I'd say, yes, central

[01:22:43] banks can do things private banks cannot do, but I'd be humble and I wouldn't push my luck. I I >> [laughter] >> That's If I was a central banker, I I would not view negative equity if if you mark to market, and I think you might be right, as a I wouldn't wear that as a badge of honor, I think, because eventually, if you keep doing enough of that, I think people might actually lose faith in any IOUs that your central bank issues, and that's when that's when the real trouble starts. But, what's the general implication? >> [snorts] >> The general implication is very troubling for Japan because basically, we did a simple counterfactual in our paper where we said, well, suppose that there hadn't been any of these large-scale asset purchases, and yields had been 200 basis points higher, and suppose that they hedged currency risk completely. Well, that 6.25% number of GDP, that's

[01:23:44] gone. It's zero, essentially. So, they would not have been harvesting any excess returns. What that means is, of course, then if if you keep running these big deficits, now your net liability position would also increase dramatically. And you'd be in big trouble, and you would see a fiscal crisis. So, the lesson here is, I think that's a lesson for us right here in the states, but also actually in Europe, is [snorts] if you go down this path, and and you do a little bit of financial repression, you got to be careful, because pretty soon you'll be doing a lot of it. That's the first lesson. It because it's kind of it it feels comfortable after a while. People don't notice. You can call and by the way, nobody calls it financial repression. That's part of the genius, right? Never. They say it on the podcast, but you'll never hear it at a conference. You'll never hear it the central banks will never say it. You'll never hear it from a politician, never. If you use

[01:24:46] that word in front of a central banker, they'll make the they'll make they really don't like it when you when you use that word. It it sort of there's a bit of a taboo. Which is funny because if you look at financial history, it's super common. Having said that, I think the lesson is if you go down this path, um you'd better have an exit strategy and it's hard to see any good exit strategies for Japan. It's very hard to extricate yourself from decades of low rate policies because you've been distorting everything. You've been distorting the incentives that politicians have. You've been distorting the market signals that the bond market sends to politicians. There are no bond market vigilantes in Japan because they were obliterated. They call that the widow maker trade, shorting Japanese government bonds. So so it's it's it's actually a pretty bad

[01:25:46] situation to be in. I am really glad that I am not at the Bank of Japan and I'm not responsible for trying to navigate out of this crisis. I feel for the people who have to try and do this. Especially because and this is the the conundrum, they can't even talk about it openly because once you you're in the business of doing fiscal policy at a nominally independent central bank, you can't even have an open discussion of what you've done and what the position and and so you you end up using all sorts of jargon to really avoid speaking the plain truth, which is that you're you're in deep trouble and it's going to be awfully hard to keep your government funded. To put it in a nutshell, they can't keep rates artificially low because they have an inflation problem, but they cannot increase rates either because if they

[01:26:47] increase rates because of what we said, there is a serious risk that the government essentially becomes insolvent and the government might have serious trouble funding itself. Ultimately, what should have happened is Japan should have realized boy, we we're on a different demographic trajectory now. Our [snorts] people are not having babies, we're not admitting immigrants, our population is growing older quickly. We've made a bunch of promises to these older people that unfortunately we cannot keep and we're going to instead of doing that and almost any politician will choose this path, they've chosen the path of financial repression for reasons we talked about, but it seems like they've reached the end of the road. I don't think they can keep doing this unless I'm missing something. And so, it'll be interesting to watch. I

[01:27:48] hope we learn something from it in the US because I think it's very relevant. We're not exactly on the same demographic trajectory because the fertility rate is still quite a bit higher. I think it's around 1.6 in the US, right? Give or take. We're not in in in sort of I think Japan is roughly around one, I think. So, it's very low. Maybe it's only lower in South Korea. And the population is literally shrinking. Their population is shrinking. It already peaked a while back and it's literally shrinking and it's aging quickly. Life expectation is very high both for Japanese men and women. And so, it's a huge problem. And they don't really have a lot of net immigration as far as I can tell. So, yeah, what they should have done is is sort of had a conversation with all the Japanese people and tell them,

[01:28:49] "You know, those promises we made, I I don't think we can keep them, honestly." But but I don't think they ever had that conversation and and so, now they're they're really in a very unappealing position. And so, the consolidated government balance sheet in terms of net liabilities as a percentage of GDP, in 1997, they were 25%. They ballooned to 118% and via these financial parlor tricks, let's call them, genius financial parlor tricks, the uh total liabilities as a percentage of GDP actually went down from 118% to 94%. You're saying if these tricks and the carry trade ends, that liability as a percentage of GDP is going to go a whole heck of a lot higher. How much higher? And how much is the on this consolidated thing? You know, there was a paper Ken Ken Rogoff wrote a certain level of debt to GDP and therefore bad things are going to happen. The total government

[01:29:49] debt to GDP is in Japan is is now, you know, way way way higher and as well as higher than that threshold in the US. We avoided these horrible consequences, but if you look at the consolidated net liability position, what is the danger zone? Where Where is the danger zone for for Japan? I Oh, I think they're in it. I mean, if if to be completely honest and and first of all, I want to go back and and and um mention that I I think we all owe Ken Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart a great debt for for sort of writing that book they wrote about a decade ago. They got a lot of criticism back then because the intellectual climate was one of fiscal exuberance and sort of oh, well, we could ours lower than G. We can keep running big deficits. We're going to grow our way out of it. I think what we now know is that Rogoff's work was prescient in a way. He was wrong. He was right, excuse me, about to to

[01:30:50] sort of call out the fact that those that we were not on a fiscal fiscally sustainable trajectory in a lot of advanced economies. And I think the evidence is that we've resorted to financial repression in Japan, in the Eurozone, and actually, I'll say to some extent in the US as well, certainly during during COVID. So, I think the work by Rogoff and Reinhart deserves to to get another close look and I hope there are more young economists who will take it seriously. Now, coming back to your question, you were saying well, where is the where is the the danger zone? What is the number? I think there I'd I'd say we have to be really humble. I I don't think we know. But but the point is, why try and find out exactly where the

[01:31:51] number is? I think the responsible thing to do when you think about our kids and our grandkids is is not to go there because one thing I know from looking at countries that experience fiscal crisis is that that that's very unpleasant. >> [laughter] >> And we don't want to leave our kids in a situation where they're definitely headed for a fiscal crisis. The problem when you deliver this message, especially to Americans, I think is that Americans have not really experienced a fiscal crisis. We've been very blessed in our history. And but that also makes us extremely complacent, I think. Sadly, this is, I think, one of the big challenges of our time. I think the path we're on is extremely unfair to young Americans and especially to the unborn. And somehow, I think on the left this is often dismissed as a conservative

[01:32:53] talking point. And it that's very unfortunate because I I actually think that if you care about intergenerational equity, and you should, whether you're on the left or on the right, then you have to realize that this is a real issue. Governments do face intertemporal budget constraints, and eventually they kick in. Financial repression can sort of make it look for a while like governments are not subject to budget constraints. And actually, there was sort of a school of thought in the US that was really influential actually during the pandemic called modern monetary theory. And and I think we now know that those ideas are are are [snorts] not really well-founded in in in serious analysis, and we should dismiss them, and we should learn to deal with the tradeoffs. There's a tradeoff here. Yes, we can keep spending money on

[01:33:55] the older generation, but if that's all unfunded by new tax revenue, then we really are burdening young Americans. Which is extremely unfair because older Americans have had a great run. They've seen They have. They've seen a huge amount of growth over their professional careers. Their labor income has gone up a lot, probably way more than the labor income of their kids will grow up unless something dramatic happens, but I'm skeptical. And so yeah, I think intergenerational equity is a is a huge un- overlooked issue. And yeah, I hope I hope that more people start to pay attention to this on on both sides of the political spectrum, actually. This is something that liberals and conservatives ought to be able to agree on, but sadly it doesn't happen. I've

[01:34:58] seen this dynamic in Europe as well. It doesn't seem to happen. >> [snorts] >> Hanno, this has been a fascinating discussion. I made a promise to our audience earlier that at the end we would return to the United States. Unfortunately, it seems like I'm unable to keep that promise, but I would be delighted to have you on in the in the future to to return a little bit from the East and go westward. Your two papers are are excellent about this topic. One published published last year called Japan's Debt Puzzle, Sovereign Wealth Fund from Borrowed Money, and most recently in April of 2026 simply called April 1st simply called What About Japan? Written by by you and your co-authors. We will link to both of those papers in the description. You are on Twitter on on X and you also have a Substack. We will link to both of those. Hanno, Lessic, thank you so much. Thank you, Jack. Thank you. Thanks for tuning in. Looking into HFGM by Unlimited, head to unlimitedetfs.com/hfgm

[01:35:59] to learn more. That's unlimitedetfs.com/hfgm. Until next time. Thank you. Just close the door.
