[00:00:00] In the wake of Trumps liberation day tariff announcement, we saw U.S. stocks, bonds and the dollar all fall at once in what many interpreted as a broad shift away from investing in America. When the stock market falls and volatility explodes like it did last week, you’d expect Treasury yields to fall as investors rush to safety and buy treasury bonds. That didn’t happen this time around – investors were instead selling treasuries - and their yields were spiking higher. When you see Treasury yields rise like this, you would normally expect the dollar to rise, as the higher interest rates should attract investors. That didn’t happen, either. As Robert Armstrong described it in the FT “the US policymakers had been unpredictable and incompetent at a moment where high deficits and lingering inflation worries mean that there is no room for amateurism.” As the Economist said - if investors are fleeing

[00:01:00] even though bond returns are up, it must be because they think America has become more risky. They went on to say that rumors are rife that big foreign asset managers are dumping greenbacks. These wild swings in the bond market and the fall in the dollar by most accounts caused Trump to announce a 90 day pause on tariffs. [Clip] “Well, I thought that people were jumping a little bit out of line. They were getting yippy, you know, they were getting a little bit yippy, a little bit afraid, unlike these champions.” During the market chaos we saw other safe haven markets rise as money moved into German, Japanese and Swiss government bonds – along with gold. The head of foreign exchange research at Deutsche Bank wrote in a note that “The market is reassessing the structural attractiveness of the dollar as the world’s global reserve currency and is undergoing a process of rapid de-dollarization.” Many compared the selloff in US assets to the British market turmoil in 2022 when Liz Truss

[00:02:05] announced sweeping tax cuts that she said she would pay for with massive government borrowing. Larry Summers - the former U.S. Treasury secretary wrote on twitter that the broader sell-off suggested a “generalized aversion to US assets in global financial markets” and he went on to say that “We are being treated by global financial markets like a problematic emerging market.” Ray Dalio, the hedge fund manager who has been warning for the last three years that the US could lose its reserve currency status said that we are seeing a classic breakdown of the major monetary, political, and geopolitical orders. He said that “when you reach the part of the cycle that you have to borrow money to pay debt service, and the holders of those bonds say it’s a risky situation — in the private debt market, we call that the debt death spiral,’ In one of his YouTube videos from three years ago Dalio describes how he has studied the ten most

[00:03:07] powerful empires over the last five hundred years – along with the last three reserve currencies – and how global leadership changes. He says in the video that he has found that there are 250-year economic cycles where empires rise and fall. He argued back then that we are living through a change in world leadership today and the question isn't if we're in the middle of a changing world order, it’s how deep in we are and what can we do to prevent this change before it's too late. The most worrying market event of the last few weeks was the spike in US Treasury yields, and the correlation that was seen between stocks, bonds and market volatility. While markets have since calmed down, investors are still concerned that foreign buyers are stepping away from US Treasuries and now wonder if it is wise to apply a risk premium to US assets. Some have even suggested that China might have been dumping U.S. Treasuries last week to put

[00:04:09] Trump under pressure to walk back his tariffs. So is Ray Dalio right – should we be concerned about the US dollar losing its reserve currency status? Before we dig into that let me tell you about this week's video sponsor Cove Pure who sent me their new CP16 water filtration system to try out. The CP16 sits on your countertop and requires no plumbing the two filters eliminate up to 99% of contaminants including heavy metals microplastics forever chemicals and arsenic obviously you don't want any of that in your water it comes with a built-in water jug that you can bring to the table during meal times i drink a lot of tea and coffee and if you go to a good coffee shop you'll notice that they have big water filtration systems as filtered water improves the taste but also reduces the maintenance needed for their coffee machines the Cove Pure filter provides instant hot or cold water and you can set the temperature

[00:05:13] you want it to be if you drink green tea you ruin the flavor by using boiling water you're supposed to use 80 to 85° water which is hard to get right with a kettle but it's easy with the Cove Pure i like this so much that I'm planning on getting a second one for my office go to covepure.com/patrick or click on the link in the description to get $200 off the Cove Pure Ray Dalio told CNBC last week that he is concerned about trade disruptions, mounting U.S. debt, and emerging world powers bringing down the international economic and geopolitical structure that has been in place since the end of World War II. He said that while Trump’s tariffs have understandable goals - they are being implemented in a “very disruptive” way that creates global conflict. He called for a trade agreement with China, said that Congress should reduce the federal deficit to 3% of GDP

[00:06:14] saying that “the very value of money is at stake.” While I agree with Dalio that the trade chaos that we have seen in recent weeks is bad for the United States and I worry that other unconventional ideas that some of Trumps economic advisors have been discussing - like Stephen Miran’s Mar-a-Lago accord - are extremely worrying – I don’t agree that the dollar will loose reserve currency status any time soon – simply because there is no reasonable alternative to the Dollar right now. If you are interested – I’ll discuss Miran’s Mar-a-Lago accord towards the end of the video. The US Dollar first took on reserve currency status in 1944 - as World War II was drawing to a close. That year, representatives from 44 nations met at a hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire to hammer out a new financial system for the global economy. Out of Bretton Woods came the World Bank, the IMF and most importantly, a new role for the

[00:07:15] dollar as the "international reserve currency." At the time, Europe was in rubble – the formerly world leading economies were destroyed and the United States controlled most of the world's gold. The US agreed to fix the value of the dollar to gold at $35 an ounce and other countries then fixed their exchange rates to the dollar, making the dollar the central cog in the overall system. In 1971, Richard Nixon suspended the convertibility of the dollar into gold - and the fixed exchange rate system became a floating exchange rate system, but the dollar still remained at the center of it as the international reserve currency. The dollars special role has long irritated politicians from other countries and the French Finance Minister in 1960 famously complained about America’s "exorbitant privilege" as the US could print paper to buy physical goods from its trade partners. Other countries he argued had to create goods to earn currency.

[00:08:19] In 2022 when Russia invaded Ukraine - the United States was able to sanction Russia – freeze their dollar reserves and cut them off from the global financial system. A number of world leaders expressed concern at the time that the United States could weaponize the dollar and access to the global financial system. At the time – this wasn’t a huge concern for most countries – as they didn’t envision a world in which they were at odds with the United States. Most international leaders felt that if you weren’t planning on a war of aggression – there was no reason to worry about the weaponization of the dollar. That’s how the thinking went at the time. US government debt has long been the preferred place for central banks around the world to store their reserves because of the size and strength of the country, the safety and tradability of its debt and the dominant role of the dollar in international trade and finance, and (of course) the rule of law. As the FT pointed out this week to highlight the global importance of the dollar - while the US

[00:09:25] only accounts for about a quarter of the global economy, more than 57 per cent of the world’s foreign exchange reserves are held in dollars. About 60 per cent of all international loans and deposits are denominated in dollars, and 70 per cent of international bond issuance is too. In foreign exchange, 88 per cent of all transactions cross reference the dollar – as while there may not be a liquid market between two small currencies – there will be a liquid market between each of them and the US dollar. The FT points out - that even physical US bank notes are widely held abroad - where about half of all US bank notes in issue are held by foreigners. The Euro is the principal alternative- and it makes up 20 per cent of central bank reserves. After that comes the Japanese Yen and the British pound. In the past – foreign owned - US Treasury bonds were seen – in the US - as a source

[00:10:26] of geopolitical leverage. Hillary Clinton – the then secretary of state famously asked in 2009 – when talking about China - “How do you deal toughly with your banker?” This way of thinking has changed significantly in recent years – where owners of US assets now instead worry about upsetting the country that holds so much of their central bank reserves. So why do foreign countries own so many dollars? Well, as the economist Michael Pettis frequently points out - If a foreign country runs a current account surplus - exporting more than they import - they accumulate the currency (and thus the bonds) of the country with the largest current account deficit. The deficit country which is importing more than it exports – has to borrow money to do this – and it borrows money by issuing bonds. Their bonds are going to be the most available to invest in – and thus that’s where the money goes.

[00:11:27] Central banks keep their reserves in US dollars, Euros, Yen and pounds, for one very simple reason. Only those economies and financial systems are large enough, open enough, flexible enough and trustworthy enough to accommodate large trade deficits. But… the badge of honor associated with being a reserve currency does come at the cost of a nation’s ability to manage its debt levels. If other countries are going to buy your currency – you can either let your currency rise in value – or issue additional bonds to stabilize the exchange rate. China – which is a huge economy - couldn’t replace the dollar in the global financial system with its currency - without opening its capital account and allowing the free movement of currency in and out of its economy – which it is unwilling to do. Countries like China that run a trade surplus could in theory invest their reserves in other large global economies like Europe and Japan,

[00:12:30] but - these economies also run persistent surpluses and instead of issuing a lot of bonds - are net acquirers of foreign assets too. If China, were to move from US dollar reserves to Euro reserves, the ECB would either have to tolerate an appreciation in the value of the Euro or it would have to buy other foreign assets – which means American assets - to neutralize the net impact of the Chinese inflows. [Warren Buffett - Clip] you can't get rid if you're the rest of the world you can't get rid of dollars I mean if you're sitting in Japan China or someplace and you own a lot of US government bonds if you sell them to somebody in the United States you get US dollars so you still have US assets if you sell them to somebody in France you've now got euros but they've got the the government you can't you can't get rid of those assets but you can't have people trying to head for the door very quickly with them under certain circumstances Daniel McDowell from Syracuse University has pointed out that in the past - central banks only aimed to hold enough foreign exchange reserves to cover about 3-months of their

[00:13:36] country's imports or all of their short-term debts. Reserves, from this perspective were seen as a rainy-day fund to make sure an economy can still trade and avoid default in time of crisis. Other than that – foreign exchange was earned so that foreign made goods could be purchased. Over the last twenty years or so, central banks around the world have been growing their reserves well beyond this point, and once reserves get larger (as has been happening), Central bankers begin think of them - as a portfolio - where they want safe liquid investments, and they try to hold a diverse portfolio that optimizes and stabilizes returns over time. Brad Setser of the Council on Foreign Relations points out that as China’s reserves grew, they began to first shift their dollar portfolio from US Treasuries toward Agencies, and then equities -- basically taking a bit more risk in what is effectively an "investment portfolio.”

[00:14:38] Setser’s research shows that China began reducing the dollar share of foreign reserves starting in around 2005 and that their diversification out of the dollar was more or less complete by 2011 or 2012. The Belt and Road initiative – he points out – was a way for China to diversify their reserves into physical assets around the world. The big idea here - is that reserve currencies don’t quickly come and go – it instead takes decades for a country to gain or lose reserve currency status – not weeks or months. The United States became the leading economic power in the world in the 1870’s but didn’t have the reserve currency until around seventy years later – and this only happened when other major economies were destroyed by war. London’s role as a major financial center remains eighty years after the pound lost its reserve currency status – as London continued to be a center of financial expertise. There has been some press over the last

[00:15:44] week – pointing to Chinas stockpile of Treasuries as a lever they could use to pressure Trump – with some people wondering if Chinese selling caused the bond market chaos that we saw last week – which caused Trump to blink. China is the number two holder of Treasury bonds – coming in right after Japan – and they own 759 billion dollars’ worth of US debt. We can’t quickly work out who was selling bonds last week or why – as there is no real-time data available, but if China decided to do that – they would be harming the value of their investments in order to hurt the United States which may not make a lot of sense. Chinese treasury holdings have been steadily falling to the lowest level since 2011 according to the US Department of the Treasury – but it’s not easy to know their exact holdings. Brad Setser points out that some of China’s foreign asset holdings show up

[00:16:45] in the Chinese state-owned banks. Additionally, holdings listed as belonging to countries like Belgium are seen as being linked to custodian accounts in China and these have been growing. It is quite possible that China – and other international investors might not be actively selling US assets – but they may be nervous about buying any more – and a big buyer who walks away will also have an impact on markets. The lower demand will show up in the pricing too. US outperformance in recent years has been a bet on US exceptionalism. Investors bet on Americas cutting-edge industries, its unrivaled universities, the rule of law and a pro-business culture. Janan Ganesh wrote back in January that unlike other countries - the United States never had a specific growth strategy – but whenever growth bumped up against another imperative the American bias was to choose growth. Ganesh

[00:17:47] points out that other countries will claim that growth is a priority – but then add an additional priority – which is the one they really care about. The US was different he said as whenever growth came into conflict with another priority – for Americans – growth always prevailed. Robin Wigglesworth wrote this week that - whether by accident or design, almost every action taken by the US government over the last three months has hurt the dollar. The dollar index — which measures the strength of the dollar against a basket of its biggest peers — fell 2.8 per cent last week alone and is down almost 9% since its peak in early January. The dollar smile theory is an idea first observed about twenty years ago by Stephen Jen and it refers to the way that the US dollar typically underperforms other currencies when global growth is moderate but outperforms when either the US is booming or during

[00:18:48] times of market stress. In panicked markets – according to the theory - people want to be in dollars for safety – regardless of the state of the US economy. This was clear during the global financial crisis – when the dollar rose and again during the COVID panic in 2020 as investors rushed to the dollar for safety. Reuters point out that so far in 2025 - the dollar has failed to respond positively to market stress, suggesting that a profound shift in investor behavior may be afoot. The worry now - is that the Trump administration’s apparent willingness to upend norms means that previously unthinkable things are now possible. In such a scenario – the dollar can no longer be viewed as a safe haven. Katie Martin wrote in the FT this week that US stocks carry political risk for the first time. Its bonds no longer act like they are

[00:19:49] truly risk-free. The dollar is not acting like a magnet during periods of stress, nor like a currency anticipating an upswing in American economic growth. Last June, before taking on his current role at the treasury – Scott Bessent criticized his predecessor Janet Yellen, for issuing a lot of short-term treasuries and reducing the supply of longer-term treasuries – he described this as stealth quantitative easing saying that it was being used to stimulate markets in the lead up to the election. Bessent claimed that he would reverse this - but has instead doubled down - doing it on a larger scale than before. Under Janet Yellen – the maturity profile of treasuries was still within the normal range. Bessent now says that he will keep the dollar quantity of long-term treasuries steady – which sounds fine - but because the budget deficit is growing - this means he is issuing proportionally fewer long-term bonds. What Bessent is doing is essentially a bet

[00:20:55] that long-term interest rates will fall. If he expected them to rise – he would want to lock in today’s low rates right now by issuing long term bonds. Instead, he is borrowing short term – which means that he constantly has to refinance – and if rates go up he will be refinancing at higher and higher interest rates. The rapid U-turns in US trade policy are destroying both consumer and business confidence to the extent that analysts are now slashing their growth estimates and worry that the trade chaos will trigger a recession. If the new trade policies cause inflation and reduce growth – which is reasonable to expect – the Federal Reserve will find itself in a very tricky position. The Fed is already expecting something like stagflation from the current economic policies. If that happens, Powell – or whoever replaces him at the Fed - will have to choose between the Federal Reserve’s employment and price stability mandates. The US government already runs a budget deficit

[00:22:00] of 7% of GDP which is quite high for a healthy economy. In its quest to renew and extend the tax cuts from Trump’s first term, Congress has agreed to borrow even more. The amount the US spends on interest on its debt has exploded over the last five years, meaning that higher bond yields would cause big problems. The yield on long term bonds essentially tells the administration whether they can spend or not. Earlier this month the House of Representatives approved the Senate’s plan for a budget that could add $5.8 trillion dollars to deficits over the next ten years, according to the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. That is more – they point out - than Trump’s first-term tax cuts, the response to the covid-19 pandemic and Biden’s stimulus and infrastructure bills combined. The US is already spending half of its budget

[00:23:01] on interest rate expenses alone, Elon Musk’s DOGE has failed to make any significant cuts to government spending despite causing huge disruption. A tax cut combined with lower growth could spook the bond market - as in such a scenario you would see debt growing faster than GDP – with no special event to explain it like the global financial crisis or Covid. In such a scenario investors could stop buying government bonds and interest rates would rise. Much like with Liz Truss’s mini budget disaster a few years ago, the bond market might not behave for the US administration - making America’s fiscal profligacy much more difficult to maintain. If interest rates were to rise rapidly as investors backed away from buying US Treasuries – Bessent’s decision to lean more on short term treasuries to fund the government could turn out to be a huge mistake. We are already seeing real world problems

[00:24:04] associated with Trump’s tariffs. The Dallas Fed’s energy survey showed a small increase in activity in the oil and gas sector for the first quarter of 2025 – but with oil prices down and the and the cost of drilling up – this doesn’t work for the oil and gas sector. Tariffs on steel have pushed up the cost of new wells by 10 or 20 percent, according to some estimates. We have already seen a collapse in ocean container bookings since the tariff announcements. The lack of containers arriving at US ports is hitting the trucking industry too – not unlike the way it hit British truckers in the wake of Brexit. Mack Trucks announced this Thursday that they plan to lay off as much as ten percent of their workforce in Allentown Pennsylvania over the next three months. Their spokesperson told the press that “Heavy-duty truck orders continue to be negatively affected by market uncertainty about freight rates, demand, possible

[00:25:06] regulatory changes, and the impact of tariffs.” Most of the big Trump Trades that investors placed when the election results were announced are now failing and being unwound. Investors had bet on a strong dollar and a weak euro – they had bet on cryptocurrencies – pushing the price of bitcoin above $100 thousand dollars after the election results were announced. They expected emerging markets to underperform and big American tech firms to outperform. None of this has worked out as planned. A lot of people have been asking if China holds any cards in fighting back against Trump’s tariffs – and of course they do – that’s where cards are made after all. The United States is in a stronger bargaining position than China is – as the US is the biggest market for Chinas manufactured goods. One problem though is that the United States can’t actually source many of the goods it buys from China internally – or from anywhere else.

[00:26:09] China – on the other hand - can replace its imports from the US more easily – as China mostly buys agricultural produce from the United States - so a big winner from this trade war will be Brazil who were a big winner in 2019 too - when the first round of tariffs was announced. Brazilian farmers – according to Reuters - are already seeing additional Chinese demand for soybeans. There has been a lot of press about how the US is reliant on China for rare earth metals which we are always told are crucial for building missiles fighter jets and other high-tech products. While that is true – Javier Blas at Bloomberg points out that the United States only imports around 170 million dollars a year worth of rare earth metals – and the majority of them are used in things like the motors in power tools and vacuum cleaners. Many of the companies who need these metals have already stockpiled them and even if the United States had to

[00:27:10] pay up for them – it wouldn’t be a major expense. So, Will China blink first in this trade war? - well, that is hard to answer – as it is not really clear what China could even offer Trump in order to satisfy him. Trump – for all we know - may have no desire to negotiate anything with China and may just want the tax revenues associated with the tariffs. It is possible that he believes this will bring in enough revenue to balance his budget. There are rumors that President Xi has no plans to meet up with Trump in person to negotiate at all – as after seeing the spectacle of Ukraine’s Zelenskyy being publicly humiliated in front of the world press and being given fashion advice by Marjorie Taylor Greene’s boyfriend – political analysts are saying that there is no way that he would agree to any American led publicity stunts designed to humiliate China. There hasn’t been much press about Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 which authorized

[00:28:17] $800 billion dollars in renewable energy and climate change spending – which is now projected to cost more than $1 trillion over the next 10 years and possibly between two and four trillion dollars by 2050. People argue that Trump won’t repeal the act because so many jobs in renewables are expected to be created in Republican-led states like Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Mississippi. However, this week the Trump Administration issued an order for the leading global energy company Equinor, to stop construction on its Northeastern US Offshore Wind project. This project involved hundreds of millions of dollars of payments by Equinor to the US federal government for the Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management – ocean/land license, and Equinor had reached financial close on the project, and had drawn down over $1.5 billion of its project loans to finance construction works to date. Bankers describe

[00:29:21] the stop-construction order midway through this project - as having a “chilling effect” for international investors – given the rarity of administrations retroactively cancelling permitted and approved, and in-construction projects. The stop-work order on a multi-billion-dollar international investment project like this implies that the Trump Administration is quite likely to repeal all of the IRA tax subsidies for renewable projects. Cancelling these projects will save far more money than DOGE could, and Trump’s base is not on side for green transition projects. The investment case for projects like these only works with large government-provided cash tax subsidies. There are many ways this could work - Trump could keep the subsidies in place and disallow any usage or distribution of them. A complete repeal might be politically difficult, but

[00:30:21] Trump appears to have complete control over all branches of government – so who knows. He could even keep the subsidies in place and allow their use only for nuclear and fossil fuel projects. Predicting Trumps economic policies has been impossible so far – as they appear to change on a day-by-day basis – but this seems like something he would love to cut. There has been a certain amount of talk recently about how the Trump Administration could radically restructure and refinance US debt under what is being called “The Mar-a-Lago Accord.” This phrase was first coined by Zoltan Poszar, the former Credit Suisse Strategist last year. He put forth that the US could force countries to accept a weaker dollar and lower interest rates on their US Treasury investments in exchange for protection under the US security umbrella. The idea has been described as a “protection racket” by Martin Wolf.

[00:31:22] The name - is a take on the “Plaza Accord” – a 1985 deal where France, Japan, West Germany and the UK agreed to work with the US to jointly weaken the dollar against their currencies. Pozar’s idea was elaborated on by Stephen Miran - The chairman of Trump’s Council of Economic Advisors in a paper which provides a sort of intellectual framework for a lot of what Trump is currently doing with his trade policies. The idea being discussed - would be to force investors to accept an extension on the maturity of their treasury holdings at a below market interest rate – this is obviously something no investor would want to accept – and most would consider a default. There was a very interesting discussion on this topic on the Odd Lot’s podcast this Thursday. But the fact that people are seriously discussing a default by the US Government on its bond obligations is extremely disturbing – and

[00:32:24] tells you a lot about why investors might be worried about investing in Trumps America. To be very clear – Trump himself has never mentioned a Mar-a-Lago Accord – or discussed anything remotely similar to this idea – instead he has focused entirely on tariffs. I don’t believe that such a deal is even remotely likely – and I think that even attempting to implement a policy like this would be so destructive and chaotic for the U.S. economy and financial markets that it could never happen. As Martin Wolf asked in the FT – why would any investor believe that Trump is capable of sticking to any deal he has reached. He has, after all, abandoned Ukraine, put the commitment to Nato into doubt and mounted an assault on Canada. I am not as negative on investing in the United States as many of the people I have quoted in this video – mostly because I believe that there are sufficient checks and balances in the American form of Government to prevent any of the worst-case-scenarios that people

[00:33:29] have been worrying about from actually happening. While the US has lost some credibility – as market moving policies are announced and withdrawn in quick succession – all at a time where high deficits and lingering inflation worries mean that there is little room for mistakes. So far, the market moves have not been too extreme – the US economy is still strong – and Trump does appear to respond to market chaos by backing down – which is a good sign for investors. The problems we have been talking about are all just policy mistakes which fortunately can be reversed they are not structural and they are very different to the situations faced by the economy during the global financial crisis or during the pandemic. I do worry that a lot of retail investors have been conditioned to always buy the first market downtick - in the belief that not only do stonks always go up – but that they recover from problems at great speed. Markets haven’t yet priced in three years

[00:34:34] and three quarters more of chaos – and investors aren't really pricing in the damage that could be done to great American companies like Apple - if the president continues on his current path. The United States is a country rich in resources with an educated work force - and an entrepreneurial spirit that should not be bet against. I think that it is a mistake to want manufacturing jobs back from China. While trade is out of balance – the goal should be to sell the goods that America is best at making internationally – not to take one of the most productive workforces in the world and give them the jobs done by the 99th most productive workforces in the world. In an agrarian economy - it would be extremely difficult for one farmer – with no access to machinery - to be a whole lot more productive than his neighbor. With the high-tech businesses that America has focused on - it is possible for one worker to produce digital goods and services that can be sold all over the world generating

[00:35:39] much higher productivity - which is far beyond what can be done hand assembling mobile phones and toasters. It would be a huge mistake for America to destroy this type of business in order to bring back a type of work that is low margin, badly paid and often dangerous - especially when there is no jobs shortage in America and we have an ageing population who are more likely to be spending on services like healthcare in the coming years than on manufactured goods. At the margin investors may be less excited about owning US assets than they were in the past – and for good reason. It is worth remembering though - that the country still hosts many of the best run and most profitable businesses that have ever existed in human history – in the long run its workforce, its financial system and its infrastructure are so good that it can overcome any setbacks. If middle-class and working-class Americans have a problem – it’s that home prices have gone up faster than wages have

[00:36:44] – I don’t see how reducing the purchasing power of the dollar or taxing imported goods will do anything to improve that situation. If you found todays video interesting - you should watch my video on the frozen real estate market next. Don’t forget to check out our sponsor CovePure using the link in the description below. Talk to you in the next video, bye.
