[00:00:00] Hi, welcome to this my third data update for 2026. If you remember in the last session, I talked about the disconnect between the new stories we were seeing and how equity markets behaved, at least US equities in 2025. In this session, I want to expand the discussion but look beyond US equities. In particular, I want to focus on four stories last year that dominated the news. The first of course were the tariffs announced at the end of March early April on the rest of the world by the US large no unprecedented levels of tariffs. The second was in a couple of weeks later when the US lost its AAA rating from the last ratings agency that still gave it aa rating Moody's. So the downgrade of the US. The third was the longest shutdown in US government history which started in October 1st went all the way through November 12th. And finally, stories that sprinkled all the way through the year where there were

[00:01:02] challenges to the Fed's perceived independence. Now, what do these stories all share in common? They cut at the heart of trust. They basically make people have less trust in institutions. And I want to see how that loss of trust or at least the perceived loss of trust plays out first with US treasuries which are after all are driven by trust and governments paying off their obligations and not diluting the currency and then move on to currencies themselves. Then check in on gold and silver the precious metals and close off with Bitcoin. The story that's b going to bind all of these is the loss of trust and how it plays out in different asset classes perhaps in big or small ways. So let's look at why trust is such a critical component in economies and markets. I don't think we realize how much of the modern global economy and financial markets are built on trust in central banks to preserve the buying power of currencies after all just paper with numbers printed on it. in governments and businesses to honor their

[00:02:03] contractual commitments and in legal systems enforce that they do. Some of you live in countries where all of these are tattered know how difficult it is to regain trust once you lose it. And trust can be tennos even trust that's been earned can be lost in a few months or a few years by bad behavior. In fact, one of the divides we used to use in the last century between developed markets and emerging markets was that developed markets are high on the trust scale, emerging markets are low on the trust scale. What's happened in the 21st century? I think that distinction has been muddied by how developed markets themselves are behaved. I tell people that 2008 changed how we thought about institutions in developed markets that we trusted them less and we're still playing paying a price for that loss of trust. So with that lead and let's look at the the trust testing news stories of the year. The first of course as I said was in the tariff front on March 30th to 31st I don't remember the exact date the

[00:03:03] tariffs were announced and they shocked the market both in terms of how big they were nobody expect and how widespread every country was hit with tariffs. That was the first news story. It played out in chaos in markets for the next couple of weeks and we noticed the equity markets they came back. We'll see how the other markets did. Now, just 2 weeks later, April 16th of 2025, Moody's lowered its rating for the US just marginally from AAA to double A1. But what made it special was the fact that it was the third of the three of the three major ratings agency to to lower the rating. The other two had already done it. So there was no ratings agency giving the US aaa rating anymore. It has ripple effects on appraise of the way we think about analysis. But clearly there is that loss of that that belief that the US government will never default. On October 1st to 2025, the US government went into shutdown mode partly because of a debt limit that

[00:04:04] could not be voted on. It's basically the same kind of inaction in Congress we've seen before. What was different about this shutdown as opposed to previous ones was while those lasted a few days or a week, this one lasted several weeks. It didn't end until November 12th of 2025. And finally, over the entire year, you saw news stories, some in the actual news, some in social media challenging the independence of the Federal Reserve. Who should lead it? Who should sit on the board? Kind of bubbled under the surface. What do these stories have in common? They all cutting at the heart of trust. How much you trust governments, central banks. So if you look at why this has happened, I think many people the easy answer they give is Donald Trump. I think that's too easy, too file an answer cuz it's not as if we trusted until 2025 and we lost trust in 2025. In my view, we've been moving towards this for a couple of decades. That loss of trust and let me

[00:05:06] make the case for that. This notion that we've been tariff-free now for a while is a myth because we've had tariffs and in fact you could argue that the global free trade movement started running out of steam about a decade ago and that the barriers have only increased. The ratings uh downgrade by Moody's was was preceded by S&P downgrading the US in 2011 and Fitch in 2023. So it wasn't that much of a surprise and the Fed much wanted independence. I think, you know, we we forget how much of it is based more on norms than on legal structures. And this notion that the Fed has been truly independent till 2025, I think feeds into that mythology. The Fed, does the Fed hear political voices? Absolutely. Does the Fed bend? Yes. Whether you're Ben Berni or Janet Yellen, you know, or Jerome Powell, you've bent to political structures. What's different is this time it's been brought into the open. So whatever the

[00:06:08] reasons, clearly the trust issues front and center. Let's see how it played out in different markets. Let's start with the US Treasury market in 2025. In this graph, I look at US treasuries ranging from 3 months to 30 years all through the year. And as you can see, I've also drawn that line because after all, these are US treasuries. And you would think when you get downgraded as a country, you'd see it in the treasury. Not much of an effect there, right? In fact, if you see a blip in April, it had very little to do with the downgrade, more to do with the tariffs. Nothing much seems to have happened to treasuries. In fact, if you look across the time horizon, here's what you see in the very long time horizons, 20 to 30 years, rates were pretty flat. 20 year and 30 year rate didn't change much. The 10ear rate actually dropped by about 39 basis points. Pretty significant drop. And as you go through the drops became increasingly larger for the 3 month, the 2-year, and the 5year rates. So short-term rates drop, long very

[00:07:08] long-term rate stays stayed pretty stable. The 10ear rate was somewhere in the middle. If you bring those all together, I'm telling you a story about the term structure and the yield curve. The yield curve during the course of the year became more upward sloping. In fact, I've looked at three measures of the yield curve. the difference between the 2-year and the 3-month rate, the difference between the 10ear and the 2-year and the 30-year and the 10ear. Why does this matter? I mean, you've heard the mythology of a flat or a downward sloping yield curve, which we live through for three or four years. Fact have shown that that mythology doesn't hold. The mythology of course you have a flat or a downward sloping yield curve, it predicts a recession. I don't think that's a very powerful indicator, but the yield curve, I think, does matter. It's it is a predictive. It it is something you can use to talk about the slowing or the strengthening of the economy with upward sloping yield curves more associated with stronger growth. The yield curve became more upward sloping. Here again there was a divergence. If you look at the 30-year minus the 10ear the difference almost

[00:08:12] doubled. The 10ear minus the 2year increased but not by as much from.3 to to 39. The 2-year minus 3 month actually went in the other direction. the 2-year rate fell relative to the 3-month rate. So, the the yield curve was doing a few different things in different levels, but overall it became more upward sloping. So, let's look at why Treasury rates did not move more. I mean, let's set up the story, right? You've got the Moody's downgrade that should have pushed up default risk. You got the Fed's independence being challenged, the tariffs, that should have pushed up inflation. You're saying, why didn't rates go up more? Let's take that apart. Let's start with the sovereign default risk question to look at how the world saw US sovereign default risk in 2025. I looked at sovereign CDS spreads. A sovereign CDS spread is actually a sovereign CDS market is actually a market where you can go by insurance against default risk. This is a measure of default risk from a market perspective. We started the year with a

[00:09:13] 5year CDS at about 30 basis points 30%. We ended the year with that with the 5 years CDS spread at 27%. During the course of this incredibly tumultuous year, the market's perception of default risk in the US is that it went down. You look at the 10-year CDS spread, we started the year at about 35 basis point. We ended up at 35 basis points. Doesn't mean that there wasn't a blip. And if you look at April, you see that blip again around the downgrade, but also around the tariffs. more driven by tariffs in the downgrade, but that blip didn't last long. So, here's the bottom line. The Moody's downgrade did not do much to increase the default risk perception of the US. If you're surprised, you shouldn't be. Markets don't wait for ratings agencies to act. They know that there's political dysfunction. They know that these things play out the way they do, and they've already built it in. And that's when I wrote about the Moody's downgrade. That's the point I made is this is not a

[00:10:14] surprise to markets. Don't expect major contortions as a consequence saying what about inflation. Go back to March or April. The story that we were hearing from economists and experts is inflation is going to blow it blow out of the box because of the tariffs that now and the market basically has its own measure of expected inflation. It's a daily minute-by-minute measure you can get where you look at the difference between the 10-year Treasury rate, which is the nominal rate, and the 10-year TIPS rate, which is the real rate. The difference between those two is actually an expected inflation number from the market. Start of 2025, that number was 2.34%. Markets are expecting inflation in the 10 over the next 10 years to be 2.34%. Take a look at that number over the course of the year. I actually looked at shorter term treasuries and tips to see if the shorter terms is a little more of a blip in inflation, but not by much. At

[00:11:15] least from a market perspective, the expectations seem to be no matter what these stories are, inflation is not coming back. At least it's not roaring back. It'll put it at odds with experts in April or May. But by the end of the year, guess who changed their minds? Wasn't the market. It was the experts. So default risk didn't change because people had already built it in. The expectations of inflation didn't shift much. Hey, not surprisingly, you think about bringing those two numbers together. Treasury rates did not move. You think, what about Fed independence? Shouldn't that affect rates? Well, I've always believed that the Fed's role in setting interest rates is vastly overrated. I know. I know. I mean the legend is that the Fed gets together at the Federal Open Market Committee and they set interest rate that the rest of us live by. That might be true at the short end of the spectrum. Short-term rates at least a little little bit. And even it's not that strong. As you get to longer term rates, it turns out that the

[00:12:16] Fed is more of a side player than a lead player. Long-term rates are driven by two things. expected inflation and expected real interest rates captured through a growth rate. In this graph, I've looked at those two numbers over time. If you add the actual inflation and the real GDP growth as a proxy for the real interest rates and add them up, you get what I call an intrinsic risk-free rate. It's actually a remarkably powerful way of explaining why Treasury rates have done what they did over much of the last 60 years. Remember the last decade where Fed rates were really low. What was the legend? It was because of quantitative easing and central banks, right? I don't think so. It was low inflation and low real growth. In this decade, it is true that treasury rates have stayed below the intrinsic. If you look at the intrinsic risk-free rate, inflation shot up in 2022 mostly because of high inflation. They've stayed. Finally, in 2025, you're starting to see convergence. And here's

[00:13:18] where I think Fed independence matters. If you ask me why did rates stay low even as inflation and real growth kind of popped up, it's because people trusted the Fed to do the right thing. Painful though it might be to bring inflation down. If we lose Fed independence, that link that that control you have on rates might be broken. I think to be quite honest it's in it's in the best interest of politicians to let central banks be independent that maintains this you know plausible deniability if you're a government said it's not my fault the central bank did it even though that's not true it allows you to pass the buck on. So I I think you know nobody will listen to me on this one that you just let the Fed do what it does and um let rates be determined by inflation and real growth over time. Now if the final part of the b the bond market that I want to talk about is corporate bonds. Here again all those trust stories should play out right. So I took a look at default spreads by

[00:14:20] ratings class. And if you look across the ratings classes, most of the ratings classes, especially the highest ratings, the year had no impact or a very slight impact rate, the spreads didn't change much. But you get to the the lower spreads, especially below investment grade and especially CN below, you can see that the was a very different market. Default spreads didn't widen. People perceive these bonds to be riskier than they were at the start of the year. So if you look across the bond market, not much happening with treasuries other than that slope of the yield curve increasing, but you can explain that with inflation not taking off and the fact that eventually that played out in interest rates and and the perception the default risk really didn't change in 2025. Moody's downgrade notwithstanding. The same thing can be said about the corporate bond market. Not much happened here in 2025. Again at odds with all those stories. So the bond market was relatively quiet in the face

[00:15:22] of these stories that suggest loss of trust. Did it affect other markets? Let's look at the currency market. The dollar had a bad year. It weakened. In fact, I've looked at three indices here. One is a broad trade weighted index against all currencies where the dollar was 7.2%. But the dollar did worst against developed market currencies, currencies like the euro and the yen than it did against emerging market currencies, down 8% in one, 6% on the other. The dollar weakened. Trust does play a role in currencies and perhaps that can explain why the dollar weakened. We still have to explain then why the bond market did nothing and the dollar is weakening because I want to bring in another market. But trust clearly played a role in what the market did. Gold and silver prices had their best year ever. Gold was up or close to their best year ever. There might have been late year late in the 70s where gold might have done even better. But during the course of 2025, gold was up almost 65%.

[00:16:24] It broke through 4,300 at the end of um 2025. You've been watching the market. It broke through 5,000 just a couple of days ago. Silver did even better. it was up 148%. So clearly money flowed into gold and silver and it flowed to the point where traditional indicators of overpricing just were blown through. For instance, one of the measures that people have used historically to judge whether gold price is too high is to measure it relative to inflation. There's a rule called the golden rule where if you take gold prices and look against the CPI that over time it reverts back to a norm. that norm of capture of the median value of 2.93. You know what that number was at the start of 2026? 18.76. This is not just breaking through. It's blowing through historic norms. Gold is clearly at a level we've we've never seen before. Now, what about silver

[00:17:24] prices? Silver prices rose so much in 2025 relative to gold that at one level at at one level they actually came back to normal. What am I talking about? Historically, gold prices have been about 57 times the silver price per ounce. And that number previous prior to 2025 had popped up and now gold was trading at 90 times the silver price at the end of 2024. But given what silver did in 2025, silver is now back to trading at 56.9 below the median. So gold prices exploded, silver prices even more. So now we need to explain this this divergence, right? You have a bond market where investors seem to be blowing past the trust issue. They don't seem to care. You have the currency market where they care enough to knock down the gold the dollar's value but not by a huge amount 6 7 8%. Then you get to gold and silver and you got at least some investors behaving as the world is

[00:18:26] going to come to an end. Now, how do I reconcile those those findings? I think we think of the market often as this gigantic group where everybody kind of has a consensus. That's not the case, right? Markets can have subsets of investors who believe very different things. And I think that's exactly what's happening. I think the in general investors are not I I I don't think are scared by the trust deficit yet. And that's why you see bond markets doing what they are. But there's a subset of investors, I think, who are scared enough about the loss of trust that they're knocking down the pri the value of the dollar. The dollar is weakening. And within that subset, there's an even smaller subset that thinks that catastrophe could potentially be on us. And there in the in the gold and silver market pushing up prices. Obviously, they can't all be right, but they can all coexist. Now, one final investment I haven't talked about is Bitcoin. And I've written about Bitcoin over the last

[00:19:27] 15 years and I've wrestled just like advocates do. Is it a currency? Is it a collectible? And I've talked about how it cannot be valued. It's got to be priced. But if it's, you know, if it's either either a currency or a collectible, 2025 would have been a great testing year, right? After all, it's a year where if people lose faith in the US dollar as a global currency, Bitcoin, if it is truly a currency, should advance its go become a more used currency. If it's a collectible and people are losing trust in central banks, hey, they should be coming into Bitcoin. In short, I would have expected Bitcoin if it's a collectible or a currency to behave like gold or silver. And Bitcoin had a very mixed year. They started the year badly, then soared in the middle of the year. In fact, in July of 2025, the price of Bitcoin, it hit 120,000 briefly. And I wrote about Bitcoin because there were people suggesting that companies should own hold their cash in Bitcoin. And I talked about why that was a bad

[00:20:27] idea. And then over the rest of the year, Bitcoin lost almost all of the push up. And by the end of the year, Bitcoin was down 6.4% 4% in US dollar terms and almost 17.4% in euro terms. So if there's a subset of investors here, I'm not sure which subset it is because you know part of the year it's behaving like the equity in the bond markets are part of the year behaved like gold. So to to cut through the noise, here's what I did. I took Bitcoin, gold, silver, the S&P 500, small cap companies, and the 10-year bond. And this is the return in the 10-year bond, not the interest rate. The return basically is inversely related to the interest rate. When the interest rate on the T- bond goes up, the price goes down. And I looked at the correlation in weekly returns during 2025. It's one year, one slice of history. Don't overread it. But I want you to focus on the red numbers. These are the numbers with the correlations are statistically significant. So we

[00:21:28] look at Bitcoin. It's behaving more like stocks. large or small stocks than it is like collectibles. In fact, it's moving in inverse relationship with silver and perhaps not at all with gold. If you look at stocks, one of the interesting things is even though interest rates didn't do much over the course of the year, during the year there was a linkage between what happened to interest rates and stocks, but it's not the linkage you'd expect. The linkage we expect is when rates go up, stock prices go down. That was not the case in 2025. In fact, the weeks that rates went up, stock prices were more likely to go up than down. Gold and silver of course moved together, which you should expect. So, what's the bottom line? I think if you look at this table, Bitcoin continues to behave more like stock than a collectible, which is not good news for its status as a collectible. And I think, you know, it's still early in Bitcoin's life. We don't know how the future will play out, but

[00:22:29] 2025 was a very interesting testing year. So, let's bring this all together. The big news stories of the year, the tariffs, the downgrade, the the shutdown, and the Fed independence debate, all freight trust. But that trust deficit didn't make much of a difference in bond markets. So, bond markets blew through that trust issue and delivered a pretty solid year. Not much happening. But there was a subset of investors who clearly cared. You saw them play out in the currency market. The dollar got weaker and the gold and silver market where the prices just took off. Bitcoin remains an outlier, you know. And I think for the moment the risk seekers are still the people driving Bitcoin prices. They're not the risk avoiders who tend to go to collectibles. That might change in the future, but for the moment, Bitcoin is in this suspended animation where we can't quite decide what's driving it. Is it equity-like forces or is it collectible like forces? And I'm afraid

[00:23:30] that we're going to have to let that play out in the next few months or even the next few years. I hope you found this session useful and I thank you very much for listening.
