[00:00:00] Hi, welcome back. In this session, we're going to talk about valuation and pricing. Now, you say, what's the difference? Well, as we will see during the session, the words might often be used interchangeably, but they mean very different things. Of course, we could do a whole class on valuation and pricing, and I do, but this is about giving just enough information for you to be able to use it in the context of investing. So, let's set the stage. If you have to look at an investment, there are two ways you can put a number on it. The first is you can value it based on what the cash flows and the growth and the risk as a business as an investment. That's valuation. We call that intrinsic value. You might use a discounted cash flow model to get there. But there are some people might use accounting ways of getting there. But that's intrinsic valuation. You value an asset based on its cash flows. You say, what else can you do? You can price it. What's pricing? It's set on by demand and supply, mood, and momentum. It's

[00:01:01] based on what people are willing to pay for that investment. How do you estimate it? By looking at investments just like these and looking at what other people are paying for those investments. Sounds mysterious, right? But have you ever used a P ratio and comparable companies to price a company? You price a company, you haven't valued the company. So I want to talk a little bit about both at least lay the foundations for both because they both come into play in investment philosophies. Let's start with intrinsic valuation. In intrinsic valuation you value an asset based on its fundamentals. Its intrinsic characteristics. Now that might sound mysterious but those intrinsic characteristics can be captured in three components. Expected cash flows and the growth in those cash flows and the uncertainty you feel about receiving those cash flows. Now, of course, the tool that people often use in the context of intrinsic valuation is discounted cash flow valuation. Discounted cash flow valuation just a way of assessing intrinsic value by

[00:02:02] first estimating the expected cash flows, then estimating a discount rate that reflects a risk and taking a present value of the cash flows. In fact, before we look at those inputs, let's look at the two phases of discounted cash flow valuation. The most common one is to take expected cash flows in the numerator. Those expected cash flows if you're a business will come from revenue growth and margins and expectations about how the business will do and discount them back at a risk adjusted discount rate. We talked about some of those risk adjustments in the last two sessions. The present value of the expected cash flows is the value of an asset. But in the last session on equity risk, we talked about an alternative way of adjusting for risk where instead of using expected cash flows, you came up with certain equivalents. We admitted that's not easy to do. But investors often make conservative estimates of cash flows, account only cash flows you can you you feel are pretty close to guaranteed. And if that's the case, you're looking at

[00:03:03] certain equivalent cash flows, you've already adjusted for risk, you can discount them back at the risk-free rate. I have never seen and I'll be quite honest I've never seen a good valuation using the second approach because it requires a whole lot of dancing around estimates that people are unwilling to do. So the first approach is the more common one. Now within the context of a business there are two ways you can approach valuation. One is you can focus on valuing just the equity in the business. Remember there are two ways you can fund a business. You can borrow the money debt or use your own money equity. The equity cash flows are the cash flows left over after everybody else has been paid including the lenders. Those are called cash flows to equity. You discount them back at the rate of return you demand as equity invested. The cost of equity. You come up with the value of equity in a business. The other is to value the entire business and that entire business gets its value both from investments it's already made. We call that assets in place and growth assets, things

[00:04:03] they're expected to do in the future. Get familiar with this structure because we're going to bring it back over and over again during the course of this class to draw a contrast between value investing and growth investing. You value a business, you look at the cash flows to all claim holders. Remember, now lenders are also claim holders. A collective cash flow, a pre-debt cash flow, it's called cash flow to the firm. You discount it back at a discount rate that reflects not just what equity investors want, cost of equity, but all what lenders want, which is the cost of debt. That composite cost is called the cost of capital. The present value that you get is the value of the entire business. Of course, you might still be interested in equity in which case you net out the debt you owe, you got the value of the equity in a business. Now, rather than get focused in on estimation questions, when I think about discounted cash flow valuations or intrinsic valuation, I think of four questions to which I need answers to value business. The first is to the extent that the company already has investments it's made. What are the cash flows from those

[00:05:04] existing investments? Those cash flows can either be before debt payments, firm cash flows or after debt payments. The second question and this is really where you trip up and you get uncertain is what's the value expect to get from growth assets? The investments are expected to make in the future. Now that value added as we will see can be great if you're a company in that takes investments that generate value but it can also be neutral. You can grow and not add value and grow and even destroy value. That might puzzle you but we'll come back and examine why. And again that growth can either be to equity investors looking at equity earnings and cash flows or to the entire firm. How risky are those cash flows? Now you can draw on what we've talked about the equity risk and debt risk but you can either focus on just the risk in the equity using the CAPM or the arbitrage pricing model or proxy model or whatever model you've decided to use or the risk in the entire firm risk in operations. And

[00:06:05] there's a final question this might puzzle you as to why you need the answer is when will your firm become a mature firm? You say what's a mature firm? A mature firm is a firm growing at a rate less than or equal to growth rate of the economy. You're saying, "Why do I need to know?" Because your job is to assess the value of an asset. The value of an asset is the present value, the expected cash flows on that asset over its lifetime. You still don't get it, right? If a publicly traded company, it can at least in theory keep going and going forever. Nobody can estimate cash flows forever. We want closure. We want to stop estimating cash flows, but we can't just ignore what happens after that. But if I tell you that your firm will grow at a constant rate forever beyond that point in time, mathematics helps you by giving you the value of those cash flows. It's called a terminal value. But you can do that only if your growth rate is constant forever. Now do you see why a mature firm assumption comes in? You cannot grow at a rate faster than the

[00:07:05] economy forever. Why? Because then you'll become the economy. By telling me when your firm become a mature firm, you're telling me when I can put closure. Ultimately all of intrinsic valuation is trying to answer those questions. You can see it show up in the equation. So let's say you're trying to value a business. The cash flows from existing assets get you started. Those are the numbers that are your starting your base year numbers. The value of growth shows up in two places. One is as a growth rate you use to increase your cash flows over time and revenues over time. But also in the reinvestment you got to put in to get that growth rate. The net effect is what's going to determine whether growth is going to add value, do nothing for value, or destroy value. The risk in the cash flow shows up through the discount rate. And finally, when you tell me your company is ready to settle in, I compute that value in a terminal value, the value of the company in perpetuity if need be once you put closure in. That's essentially how DCFS connect up to the questions you're trying to answer. Very

[00:08:07] quickly talking about those inputs that go in there, you talk about cash flows, especially looking at cash flows to the FU, which are pre-debt cash flows. You can't start with net income because net income is after interest expenses. And this is a pre-debt cash flow. You have to start with operating income. I mean, this might sound obvious, but operating income can actually be written as revenues and operating margins. And the reason I break it out is you forecast operating income. You might start with revenues and especially if your margins are changing, estimate what your margins will be over time. You have to net out taxes, but not the taxes you actually paid, but the taxes you would have paid if that operating income are taxable. You might say, why I don't pay taxes on that? Because you don't want to double count the tax benefits. You're saying, what double count the tax benefits? The next slide you're going to see discount rates and dis the cost of debt is an after tax cost of debt. It allows for the tax benefits from debt and you don't want to count those tax benefits again in your cash flows. That's why we look

[00:09:08] at the taxes you would have paid in your operating income. You net out the reinvestment and that reinvestment can be in factories if you're a manufacturing company, but it can also be in things we call intangibles if you're a non-manufacturing company. And what you're left with is the free cash flow to the firm. If you have to compute free cash flow equity or one step away, you bring in your debt payments, interest payments, principal repayments, and if you're borrowing money, that cash flow as well, your free cash flow equity. Cash flows are after taxes and after reinvestment. And if the cash flow is equity, they're after debt payments. On discount rates, we've talked enough, right? Previous session was all about how to come up with that discount rate. The CAPM it's captured with the beta end as your measure of risk and equity risk risk-f free rate but the I gave you alternatives the arbitrage pricing model multifactor models even proxy models ultimately you come up with an expected return on risky equity investment that's your cost of equity your cost of capital is a weighted average of that cost of

[00:10:10] equity and your after tax cost of borrowing money what what is that after tax cost of borrowing money it's the rate at which you can borrow money net of the tax benefit you get from borrowing on growth itself. I want to first draw your attention to a linkage that I think is worth remembering especially over the long term to grow. You can't just magically just put in a number. You got to reinvest money back into the business and reinvest it well. The way we measure those two dimensions depends on whether you're looking at equity the entire firm. If you're looking at equity, what you reinvest will be what you don't pay out in dividends, retained earnings or a retention ratio. And how well you reinvest will be captured the return on equity you make on your investments. With operating income, what you reinvest can be captured with the reinvestment rate. What you put into man, you know, net capex, which is what accountants measure as, you know, what you put into long-term assets, net of depreciation,

[00:11:11] and change in working capital. That's what you have to reinvest to grow as a percentage of your after tax operating and how well you reinvest is captured with your return on capital. So the risk of stating the obvious it's easy to grow just reinvest lot you do a lot of acquisitions but if you grow by with terrible returns in equity and returns in capital you can destroy value quality growth requires that rare company that's able to reinvest a lot and reinvest well at the same time. Second, and this is a truism that tends to hold at all companies. The larger you get, the more difficult it becomes to maintain these numbers. Think of what reinvesting 80% of your after tax operating income and earning a 30% return on capital might not be a big deal when you're a billion dollar company, but it becomes a much bigger deal when you're a hundred billion dollar company. You got to take a lot more projects and be able to deliver that same return. And finally, the risk of repeating what I've said, you can grow and destroy value. The

[00:12:11] return on capital you earn is less than your cost of capital. The return equity earned is less than your cost of equity. And finally, the closure here comes from making that assumption that you can grow at a constant rate forever. What does that give you? It gives you an infinite series in mathematics. And 200 years ago, mathematicians solve for that series. We stole it in finance. We act like we invented it. But here's what goes into terminal value. First, you have the operating income, and this is the value of the entire firm. And you can have an analogous equation for equity. You look at the after tax operating income in the year after your terminal year. So you want to get the terminal value in year 10, you have to get the earnings in year 11. Why? Because all present value equations require an earnings one year out or a cash flow one year out. You put aside money to reinvest. How much depends on your growth rate in perpetually. If you want a 3% growth rate, you got to reinvest more than if you want a 2% growth rate. How much will depend on your return in capital. So you have a

[00:13:11] 20% return in capital and you want to grow 3% a year. You got to reinvest 15%. You net that out. That becomes your cash flow. And in your denominator you have your cost of capital minus your growth rate in perpetuity. Now I know people look at and say what if my growth rate is equal to my cost of capital. Remember you can do this you know use this approach to get the terminal value only if you're a mature firm. that growth rate has to be less than or equal to the growth rate of the economy which means by definition it'll be less than your cost of capital. Those are the inputs that drive value and an estimation that opens you up to challenges and I'll know set this up because it's going to come into play as we look at different investment philosophies. Your cash flows from existing assets you got to be comfortable enough with accounting to be able to gauge what the company made to estimate the value of growth. You need to know the company's history. You need to know what the competition is doing, market potential. All of that research is directed to assessing how quickly can I grow and how much value for the risk

[00:14:13] and the cash flows. You can look at past prices, past earnings, what the pure group looks like. And for steady state to get a sense of what your company look, you can look at the largest and most mature companies in the space. There is no simple template that I can offer you that will work for every company. And that's good, right? Because otherwise chat JPT could do this. Your job in assessing value comes with challenges. And those challenges and how you deal with them is what separates great investments from good investors to average investors to bad investors. At the risk of taking a valuation that's very old. This was my Twitter preIPO valuation October 27th of 2013. To get their earnings, I had to start with revenues. You're saying why did you just take operating income? because they're a money losing small company. But in my valuation, I've taken those small revenues and made them into big revenues. Looking at the online advertising market and telling a story of Twitter being a successful online

[00:15:14] advertising player, but a niche player, not the main player. In my story, it wasn't going to be a Facebook because, you know, no company would just use Twitter for all of its advertising. Over time, I did assume the losses would not just go away, but that the margins would improve to 25% by looking at healthy online advertising players. But I did assume to grow, they would have to reinvest a $150 of revenues for every dollar of capital. The net effect is in my valuation. If you look at my free cash flows, they're big negative numbers. But don't freak out. It's exactly what you'd expect in a high growth company with a lot of ambitions. Eventually, the cash flows turn positive. I assume the company becomes mature after year 10 growing at a constant rate forever. At least initially I give them a really high cost of capital. Why? They're a risky company. They have a high beta. They don't use much debt. That cost of capital will decrease over time down towards that of an average company, an 8% cost of capital. And in stable

[00:16:14] growth, I do assume they can continue to earn more than their cost of capital. And while they're growing 2 and a half%, they'll still have to reinvest to get that growth. All of those things I talked about in the context of a generic valuation. You see that play out in the cash flows. I value Twitter at about $18 per share the time of its IPO. Mia Kalpa stock opened at $45 per share, went up to 75. Eventually, it came back down to 18. But I don't view that as some kind of consolation price. But I want to emphasize when you value a company, don't expect the market to agree with you. demand and supply mood and momentum can yield a very different answer. So that's what drives value. You're saying what can I do to change value? This is something again we're going to come back to in the context of looking at activist investing as investment philosophy. There you take an existing company and you don't just take it as a status quo. You try to change it. Change it in what way? You try to get more cash flows from existing assets.

[00:17:15] cutting costs, being more efficient, delivering more value from future growth, either by earning a higher return on capital on the projects you take or reinvesting less in projects that earn less than the cost of capital. Lengthen out your growth bid by building your barriers to entry or competitive advantages. Lower your cost of capital, changing the mix of debt and equity, maybe using cheaper debt, lowering your fixed cost, making your product less discretionary. All of those things can change the value of a company and that effectively is where the value increase from changing management in a company comes from. Now let's do it to price. What drives price? Well, could be fundamentals, but it could also be mood and momentum, right? Good moods drive up prices. Momentum is in your favor. Prices go up, shifts, prices go down. Liquidity clearly can affect prices. the ease with which you trade. But with prices, with demand and supply,

[00:18:17] you have this behavioral component of group think. If everybody else is buying, you feel the urge to buy. If everybody else is panicking, you feel the urge to panic. And finally, market prices are determined not by by total information, but by incremental information. You say, "What does that even mean?" Next time you see a high growth company make an earnings report, take a look at what happens. The information in the report might be minimal, but to the [clears throat] extent that it beats expectations, the price will react. The market price is driven by forces that are very different than the forces that drive value, which means price can be different from value. Stating the obvious, might as well. If you're ever asked to price a company, if that's what your investment philosophy requires, here's how you go about building to a pricing. First, you standardize the price. What does that mean? You can't compare price per share across companies because it's in a sense arbitrary. I do a two for one stock split. My price halves doesn't make it any cheaper. So you divide the price by

[00:19:19] something by earnings by book value. Price earnings price to book. Or you're looking at the entire firm. You look at the market price for the firm. Market price. Market price for the firm includes equity. It also includes debt. But in the extend that cash is not invested in assets. You might net it out. That's called enterprise value. The numerator captures what you're paying. It can be market value of equity, market value of the entire firm or market value of the entire firm, net of cash, enterprise value. In the denominator, you have your scalar. It can be revenues. It can be earnings either to equity investors of the firm. Can be cash flows again to either equity investors or to the firm. In fact, a very rough measure of cash flow is to take depreciation amotization added to your operating income. come up with EIDA or by book value. So the first step in this process is to scale your price. You can compare across companies. Second step, you got to pick those companies you're going to compare it to. You might pick companies in the same business, the same geography.

[00:20:21] The more criteria you add to your pure group, the smaller the pure group will become. And maybe that's your endgame. So there are choices you'll have to make. If you're if you're very strict about your choice, you'll end up with a small sample of comparable firms. If you're more, you know, more more flexible about your choices, you can end up with a larger group. So, you choose a multiply. You pick comparable firms. And then, let's say your company is trading at a PE ratio of 15. Your comparable firms are trading at a PE ratio of 20. First side, it looks cheap, right? But you got to ask the right questions. Is it cheap or is there a good reason why it trades at a lower multiple? Maybe it is riskier. Maybe it has lower growth. Maybe its growth is not coming in places that add value. Choose a multiple. Pick comparable firms. Tell your story. That's what every equity research report is. Equity research reports don't value companies. They price them. That's their mission. And that's what pricing is about. This is a very simple example of pricing. I

[00:21:21] tried to price Twitter in October of 2013. I started with all the conventional multiples. Price earnings didn't work. Company was losing money. Price to book didn't work. Company had very little book value. In fact, a negative book value of equity. You say, "What about revenue multiples?" I tried those. Enterprise value to sales. EIDA multiples. You can see lot of NAS not available. But ultimately, the multiple that I picked is going to surprise you. I divide the enterprise value publicly traded companies in the space and divide by the number of users. It explained difference in pricing better than any other multiple. You think that makes no sense. Doesn't have to. Pricing is what the market is using. In fact, if you took the $100 per user, the median price per user that you saw across companies and applied it to the 237 million users that Twitter had, you come up with about 24 billion. That's actually surprisingly

[00:22:23] close to what the market price was on that offering day. Pricing is a pragmatic exercise. You're trying to come up with a number for your company based on what similar companies are being priced at. So here are my rules for the road. If you decide to do pricing, first be consistent. Your numerator and your denominator have to be matched up. If your numerator is an equity value, market cap, the denominator has to be an equity value, net income, book value of equity. If your numerator is the entire firm, enterprise value, denominator should two should be to the entire firm. You could you cannot divide enterprise value by net income. you have to divide by operating income or EIDA or revenues. Second, this is about the data. Play Moneyball. Bring in your statistical skills to see if you can figure out why some companies look cheap and others are expensive. And if you're making implicit assumptions about your company having higher growth and less risk, try to make them explicit. Otherwise, you can fool yourself. And to

[00:23:25] the extent that you can control for differences well across companies, your pricing will get much better. Otherwise, all you will have is storytelling. So, in summary, if you're asked to attach a number to an investment, you can value it based on cash flows, growth, and risk, and use a discounted cash flow model if need be, or you can price it by standardizing the price and comparing to other things just like this thing that you're pricing and controlling for differences. I hope you found the session useful and I thank you very much for listening.
