[00:00:00] Hey everyone, and thanks for jumping back into the cryptoverse. Today, we're going to talk about Bitcoin. And we have recently launched a new and improved social risk metric. If you guys like the content, make sure you subscribe to the channel, give the video a thumbs up, and also check out the sale on Into the Cryptoverse Premium at intothecryptoverse.com. Remember, this video is recorded on March 27th, and so by the time you see it, the market may look a lot different. Uh but at least at the time of this video, Bitcoin is trading around $66,000 or so, and we just talked about how we likely would see a window of weakness going into into April. Now, we've talked a lot about social interest, and it's one of the ways in which we use to talk about why Bitcoin dominance would go up, right? If you look at uh Bitcoin dominance um for the last several years, you can see that it's been generally trending higher. And one of the reasons we

[00:01:02] thought that would happen was because of monetary policy, but because we were also looking at social interest and just seeing it generally trend down. And when that happens, Bitcoin normally takes over more and more market share. You might argue that Bitcoin dominance has been weaker recently, but I would encourage you to look at Bitcoin dominance excluding stablecoins, which is this, and you can see that the uptrend does in fact continue. So, altcoins continue to bleed to Bitcoin. You can also look at the advanced decline index of the top 100 cryptocurrencies and see that it's been in a downtrend since 2021. And then finally, you can look at all Bitcoin pairs and see that's also been in a downtrend since 2021. So, social interest in crypto has been generally dropping. And so because of that, we like to come up with a metric to kind of show us where is retail actually absent, and and where are they actually coming in in in mass. And so we've had the social risk metric for a long time, but you know, it was developed many, many years ago. Now, we

[00:02:03] have a lot more data. We were able to incorporate a little bit more data. We might tweak it a little bit, but for the most part, um I'm I'm fairly happy with it. And so I just wanted to talk about it um a little bit in in this video. The social risk metric now looks like this orange-ish red line. The line that you see the sort of grayed out is what it used to be. So, that's what it used to be, and then now you have where we are right now. All right? Now, the same stuff goes into it. We have Twitter followers, I know it's called X, but it's just Twitter. I don't know how else to say it. Followers to layer ones on Twitter, followers to exchanges on Twitter, and followers to various crypto analysts on Twitter are included in this metric, and they were included in the old one, too. We also have YouTube views to crypto YouTube channels and YouTube subscribers to those crypto YouTube channels. But we also added two more. One of those is the relative ranking of

[00:03:03] the Coinbase app. And then the other one is Google Trends for Bitcoin. So, I want to show you some of this stuff. So, for Google Trends, for instance, we have this page here going all the way back to when Bitcoin was created, um or almost all the way, you know, 2010, obviously it came out in 2009. But what you'll see is the search interest on Google of just the term Bitcoin. What you'll see is that it actually topped in 2017 and then made a lower high in 2021 and even made a lower high in uh in 2025. So, it kind of shows you that that interest has been fading specifically, but I think part of that was people got distracted with things that weren't as important. Because if you look at the social interest for say altcoin, you can see it had a major spike recently, and that's where a lot of people got drawn offside. But you could also argue that it spiked um shortly about 2 months or so before we had that major breakdown in in October. You could also look at some of the other

[00:04:04] ones like cryptocurrency and see that's been kind of putting in some lower highs from one cycle to another. You can look at crypto and see that actually made a higher high from 2017 to 2021, and it nearly got back up to that high in 2025. But in terms of Bitcoin, it it hasn't really looked that that great for a while. Um but we do now include it in the social risk metric. If you're not familiar with some of the other things that we've included in the social risk metric, some of them are things like YouTube views to various crypto YouTube channels, as I mentioned recently. You can see that on average, the the channels that are shown on this chart are averaging around 500,000 views a day total, not individually, total. Um whereas in 2021, these same channels were averaging around 3 to 4 million views a day. So, it really goes to show you how the speculative excess has kind of dissipated. And that's what you historically see when you're near the end of a business cycle, right? And again, if if you go back to this chart we've been talking about forever, the

[00:05:04] business cycle uh ITC business cycle chart, near the end of a business cycle, it's that speculative excess that that leaves first, and then it it kind of works its way down the risk curve until then stocks start taking hits, and then, you know, Bitcoin took a hit. That's why you have altcoins bleeding to Bitcoin, Bitcoin bleeding to stocks, and stocks bleeding to gold, is because it's a late business cycle environment. We got a glimpse of this in 2019 as well, where social interest also more or less dried up. You can see in 2019, we also topped um on apathy rather than euphoria. We did not see this metric go all the way up to the higher risk bands like it does at the end of the prior 4-year cycles. So, that's all affected by monetary policy, because of course crypto continues to to be a lot of dubious speculation, as we call it. But all in all, I I think the way the social risk metric looks now, you can see that it it has been generally putting in um you know, trending lower really since November of 2024. And and the reason why that's

[00:06:06] interesting is because when you look at at Bitcoin's valuation against say gold, it's been trending down since the end of 2024. And I know it had a little rally recently, but guess what? Doesn't mean a thing. It It's so what? It had a rally in March 2022. It also had a rally in in Mar- in March 2018. Doesn't mean a thing. Still went lower. So, just something to think about. The social interest helps us gauge why altseason did not happen. Why there was not that rotation into higher risk assets. When interest is generally trending down, it doesn't make sense to call for major rotations from lower risk assets to higher risk assets. That rotation only typically occurs after you have euphoria in the lower risk assets that convince enough people that the top is in. Unfortunately, with a non-euphoric top, there were a lot of people that just didn't We weren't convinced the top was in, even though Bitcoin topped when it always does, and that's in Q4 of the post-halving year. So, we might add a

[00:07:07] couple more things to this. We're kind of exploring a few different uh areas to look at at social interest. But for now, this is what it's made up of. Let me know guys Let me know what you guys think about it in the comments section below. And if you want to get access to it, as well as a lot of other different indicators that we talk about on this channel, make sure you check out the sale at intothecryptoverse.com. Thank you guys for tuning in, subscribe, and I'll see you next time. Bye.
