[00:00:00] Nobody in the United States decided 40 or 50 years ago that we don't like manufacturing. Let's abandon manufacturing. That was not a decision made by Americans. So the US has soaring debt to support consumption. China has soaring debt to support production. The two countries are sort of perfectly matched and both of them getting into debt trouble. The system is unsustainable. It needs to be broken. We're going through sort of an inevitable adjustment towards this great imbalance between countries that control their external accounts and countries that control it much less or don't control it. And we will call that trade war and trade contraction. But it's inevitable. >> Today's episode is brought to you by VanEck Rare Earth and Strategic Metals ETF, ticker REMX. Later in the show, you'll hear about the growing investment opportunity behind rare earths and why these materials are crucial to everything from smartphones to defense. Let's get into it. I'm joined today by Michael Pettis, senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment. Michael, thank you so much for joining us on Monetary Matters. My pleasure. Thank you. I want to talk a lot about China and the

[00:01:02] Chinese economy, specifically the imbalances within the Chinese economy as well as between China and the rest of the world. But how about we start off super bird's-eye view. What is wrong about globalization right now? The The problem is something that we've known about for quite a while. You know, people have been discussing this for years and years and years. It's only sort of in the 1970s and 80s that we sort of systematically began forgetting about the political aspects and institutional aspects of economics. But one of the ways to think about it is I'm going to get a little pedantic here, Jack, but every country's internal imbalance must always be perfectly consistent with its external imbalance. We typically express that with the equation the current account surplus is equal to the excess of savings over investment. But it's just a pretty obvious point. Any changes in the domestic economy must be reflected in

[00:02:04] changes in the external economy. Now, it's not always clear the direction of causality, but the two must always be consistent. So that's one rule. The other rule is that my external imbalances must always be consistent with the external imbalances of my trade partners. And that too is pretty obvious. I can't run a surplus unless you run a deficit. I can't run a deficit unless you run a surplus, right? So that creates a very interesting set of links because if I create an an internal imbalance which in turn creates an external imbalance which then creates your external imbalance then in a way my domestic policies are driving not only my economy, but they're also driving your economy. Right? Because your domestic economy is adjusting to your external imbalances, which are adjusting to my external

[00:03:06] imbalances, which are adjusting to my domestic policies. Uh American economists in particular have real trouble understanding that because I think for many Americans, you know, there's a sense that only the US has agency. So the US external imbalance is completely driven by what we do domestically, but that makes no sense, right? In the case of China, for example China runs a huge trade surplus not because it's accommodating the United States. So for example, the uh the the governor of the Chinese Central Bank doesn't get up in the morning and read the newspaper and say "Oh damn, the Americans have reduced their savings rate. We had better save more to accommodate them." That's not what happens. What ends up happening is that for a whole series of reasons, which we'll probably discuss later China has implemented policies that in the 1990s and 2000s led to very rapid growth, but subsequently have led to

[00:04:08] very large trade surpluses and a huge amount of excess domestic saving. And so what do they do with that saving? They invest it abroad, right? If you run a surplus, you have to invest excess savings abroad to balance your surplus. And where do they uh where do they invest it? Well, it turns out they do what everybody else does. There's nothing particularly Chinese about this. The Swiss do it. Colombian drug dealers do it. Anybody with excess saving tends to put it in very safe entities, in very safe economies. And that means economies with deep, liquid financial markets, with very good corporate governance, and a whole series of qualities. And basically those economies are the so-called Anglophone economies. Uh the United States by far the biggest, but also England, Canada and until recently Australia. And so the decision to invest in the United States is not made to reflect

[00:05:09] weak savings in the US. It's made to reflect excessive savings in in China. But the US, because its external imbalance has been changed by a Chinese decision to run excess savings and invest them in the US, then the US economy has to adjust. And we can get we can discuss later how it adjusts. But the point that I want to make is that if you divide the world broadly into countries that have quite a great deal of control over their external accounts and countries that have much less control over their external accounts then what you're likely to see and what you indeed see is that the former are able to implement industrial and trade policies to fit whatever they believe their domestic needs are. And those industrial and trade policies effectively become the industrial and trade policies of their trade partners.

[00:06:10] So nobody in the United States decided 40 or 50 years ago that we don't like manufacturing. Let's abandon manufacturing. That was not a decision made by Americans. That was a decision made by countries that decided to expand their share of global manufacturing and to export the imbalances primarily to the US. And so you'll notice that countries like the US, England, Canada, all of the traditional deficit countries, they all have very low manufacturing shares. And I would say again, it's not because they chose that. It's because their trade partners chose the opposite. And you know, Joan Robinson wrote about this in the 1930s and she said this isn't sustainable. And if it goes on long enough, at some point the deficit countries will try to regain control of their external accounts. And we will call that trade war and trade contraction. But it's inevitable. So the point that I would I would want to make is that that's really what we're going

[00:07:12] through. We're going through sort of an inevitable adjustment towards this great imbalance between countries that control their external accounts and countries that control it much less or don't control it. Does that make sense? That does make sense. Thank you. So that the primary country that controls its external account is China and it has a huge amount of savings and that excess savings it essentially exports or or invests. You could either say it exports its its savings or you could say that it its excess savings go into investments and then those investments produce goods that are then exported. Well, it's not quite like that. It's not quite like that because remember excess savings is the excess of saving over investment. So China invests a lot. It invests too much. It's trying to bring that investment down because more and more of it is in, you know, the the equivalent of bridges to nowhere. The problem is that China saves even more. Right? And saving is just negative

[00:08:13] consumption, right? All of your income is either saved or consumed. To So to say that China has the highest saving rate in the world is exactly the same as China has the lowest consumption rate in the world. So the problem is that Chinese production exceeds everything that China invests and consumes domestically. That's why it has to run trade surpluses. Because the alternative to a trade surplus is to produce less, which means to fire workers and allow unemployment to rise. The other point that I want to make is that a lot of people see this as a China problem. It's not a China problem. You know, not so long ago Germany was the country running the biggest surpluses. Before that it was Japan. As a share of GDP, Taiwan has among the biggest surpluses of any economy in the world. South Korea, Sweden. Uh a lot of countries do this. But the the the the main point is that that allows certain countries to control their domestic economies and it means

[00:09:15] other countries lose control of their domestic economies. So one way for this to to all resolve would be for China to increase its consumption share of GDP. Has that happened and have the attempts to make that happen been sincere or effective? I think it's been sincere, but it's really difficult to do. When you look historically at countries that had excessively low consumption shares, like the United States in the 1920s, Japan in the 1980s, Brazil in the 1970s, there are plenty of countries. In every case, they recognized that they had to raise the consumption share of GDP. But in in every case, it was brutally difficult. The US did it in the form of the Great Depression. Japan did it in the form of 20 to 30 years basically of stagnation. Both of those countries were able to raise the consumption share of GDP, but

[00:10:15] basically by lowering growth substantially in the case of the US, we had 3 years of negative growth. It's extremely hard to do. And the reason it's very hard to do, a lot of people find this hard to believe. After all, you know, if I give you more money, you're going to consume more. What could be easier than that? The problem is that you don't consume money, you consume resources. And if you structure an economy in such a way that household income is very low as a share of GDP, as a share of what households produce, then you have two qualities. Quality number one is that consumption is very low. But quality number two is that your manufacturing sector is incredibly competitive. And so it's not an accident that all of these countries with weak domestic consumption, right? Japan, Germany, et cetera, have very high manufacturing shares and very competitive manufacturing sectors. So here's the problem. If you want to solve it, it's

[00:11:15] really easy. Raise wages or raise interest rates or raise the value of the currency or somehow implement policies that shift income away from businesses to households, and immediately the consumption share of GDP will go up. The problem is that if those businesses are competitive globally mainly because of all of these subsidies and transfers in their direction, when you reverse them, they stop being competitive and you could end up seeing what you saw in the US in the 1930s, a collapse in those businesses. So you still adjust. But you adjust in the form of a collapse in GDP which is greater than the reduction in consumption. And of course, every country wants to avoid that. >> So if household income as a percentage of GDP is so low in China, who are the net beneficiaries? There's the central government, the local government, and then businesses. From my reading, it's tough to find excessive profits in

[00:12:15] Chinese companies. And then also if it's the local governments who have all the money, how come some of them are bankrupt? Well, that's what always happens. We saw the equivalent in Japan. We saw it in the Soviet Union. We saw it in Brazil. What ends up happening is that when consumption is so low, what really drives growth or high levels of investment. Now we think of investment as a good thing, but investment is a only a good thing when it's productive. If you need a bridge and you build it, you're better off. If you don't need the bridge and you build it, you're worse off. So what ended up what ended up happening in all of these countries is that in the early stages when they had very high investment needs, that very high investment and low consumption led to very rapid healthy growth. But once you close the gap between the investment that you have and the investment that you need, then high investment levels continue to generate economic activity, but you're no longer

[00:13:16] getting wealthier. So households are not doing well. Business and and governments are not doing well either because although they get a very high share of income, they're investing that non-productively. So they're destroying the wealth that they've that they've appropriated. And so everyone gets worse off until ultimately debt stops the game. That's what's happened in every single case I can find of a country that's followed this high saving high investment growth model. Michael, over the past few years, I believe it's the case that there's been a a transfer of loans from the real estate sector to the industrial sector. Talk about that and the effect that's had on China and the and the rest of the world. >> That's a great point because it shows better than anything else what the problem has been, right? So China had very high investment needs and very high investment until I would argue until around 2008, 2009. I I picked that

[00:14:17] date because normally when all of your debt goes to fund investment, and in China almost all debt funds investment, there's very little consumer debt. Then it should be impossible for debt to rise faster than GDP if you're investing productively because you, you know, you borrow $100, build something useful that's worth more than $100, so your debt goes up by 100, but your GDP eventually goes up by more than 100. And if you look at before 2007, 2008, that was the case in China. Debt grew very rapidly, but the debt-to-GDP ratio just sort of bounced around. It never really grew. That all changed around that time when debt started to accelerate and GDP started to decelerate, which shouldn't be able to happen in an economy in which almost all debt funds investment, but it happened. So that's prima facie evidence that there was a problem. But what ended up happening, of course, was that was the time of the global crisis.

[00:15:17] And the global crisis was devastating for China, right? China was running a current account surplus of more than 10% of GDP. And within two to three years, it collapsed to 3% of GDP. Now any country that gets a seven percentage point contraction in its external account is in serious trouble. It's going to have at least a recession, perhaps a depression. Nothing happened in China. And the reason is you can look at the investment data very, very clearly. The reason is that in response to the contraction in the current account surplus, Beijing engineered a huge increase in investment primarily into infrastructure, right? Now think about the logic. Nobody in Beijing said, "My god, turns out we don't have nearly enough infrastructure in this country. Isn't it lucky that I've discovered this at exactly the same time that the global crisis occurred?" That's not what anyone said. What What they said is that we

[00:16:20] don't want the global crisis to slow down the economy, so we're going to step massively on the investment accelerator. And that's what happened. Investment in infrastructure surged. But already by then there was too much, and they tried to bring it down. For that reason and a few other reasons, by 2015, around that time, the economy seemed to be getting into trouble again. Uh that's when you saw more than a trillion-dollar reduction in central bank reserves, the collapse of the stock market, et cetera. And so Beijing decided to counter that with another surge in investment, but not in infrastructure. Infrastructure was already too much. What they did is they made it easier, uh they lowered mortgage rates, they reduced the minimum purchase requirement, they removed a lot of the restrictions on apartment purchases in order to set off another wave and turned out to be the last wave of the property boom. So what we saw was that investment shifted out of

[00:17:20] infrastructure, it shifted into property. Again, I want to stress, nobody said China has way too few apartment buildings, prices are way too low. At the time, prices were already among the highest in history. We need them all to go up. And so isn't it lucky we're doing it at the same time that we need to reduce infrastructure investment. No, they did that very specifically to keep the economy from slowing. We know what happened. The uh the the what was a bubble became an out-of-control bubble, and by 2022, it came to an end. And investment in property collapsed. Now here's the problem. GDP growth is basically equal to investment growth plus consumption growth. Also net export growth, but that's small, investment growth drops sharply and you can't bring consumption growth up, and they couldn't, then the risk is that GDP growth will drop sharply, and they didn't want that. So they said, "We

[00:18:22] can't let investment growth drop sharply." So what ended up happening, and everyone has seen that very famous graph, as investment gets out of the property sector, it is replaced almost dollar for dollar for an increase in manufacturing investment. Again, I want to stress, nobody in Beijing said, "You know, there is simply not enough manufacturing capacity in China. The world and China has huge demand. We had better increase manufacturing capacity. Isn't it lucky that we discovered this at the same time as as the property crisis?" No. What they said is we cannot allow investment to drop because it's dropping in property, it's going to surge in manufactured. And what ended up happening, as a sort of an interesting anecdote, is that because governments were very eager to curry favor with Beijing, they all directed much of that investment into the the hot manufacturing sectors that that Beijing was promoting, basically electric

[00:19:24] vehicles, batteries, solar panels, things like that. So much investment poured into these areas that we ended up with a problem that around April or May of this year, we started calling involution, where you had massive capacity, way too little demand. And because companies because businesses could not stop producing, they had to keep producing stuff, and they couldn't run up inventory because the banks didn't want to finance this inventory. They had to sell them at cut-rate prices and they were actually selling in many cases below variable prices, something which you and I learned in economics can't happen. Well, it was happening, right? And so that created such havoc within those sectors that Beijing said, "Okay, we've got to stop that. We've got to reverse the excess production in the involuted sectors." And to their credit, they've done that. They reduced investment in capacity in the involuted sectors. We can see that

[00:20:25] in the inflation data, we can see that in the industrial output data, etc. But here is the problem. If you reduce investment in the involuted sectors, then you're right back to where you were in 2022. Investment is dropping and you can't allow that if you want allow GDP growth to drop. So what's going to happen is they're going to shift that investment somewhere else. Where? Probably into infrastructure and we're already seeing some indications that there will be an increase in infrastructure spending. But most likely into other non-involuted manufacturing sectors. And that includes petrochemicals, chemicals, steel, automobiles, a whole bunch of things. There was 10 industries that that 2 weeks ago the government announced that it wanted to stabilize, which means expand. So we're stuck in the same problem. If you cannot increase consumption and you will not reduce GDP growth,

[00:21:25] you cannot reduce investment growth even if you're over-investing in everything. >> And so the solution of transferring investment dollars from real estate and infrastructure and causing a real giant real estate bubble into manufacturing to produce a ton of electric vehicles within China, looking only at China, that could be actually a very effective policy. The problem is that there's excess supply, so you have to export that excess supply and that causes reverberations around the world, not just in the US, but particularly, you know, automobile-dominant countries like like Germany, which are having big big problems. In fact, the the real problem is in developing countries with automobile sectors, so Thailand, Brazil, Indonesia, etc. And in Europe. Europe is the one I think that is most at risk of whatever shift takes place between the United States and China. So very recently, so it sounds like, you know, this this fall you said that there's a change of investment dollars are moving away from involuted sectors like electric vehicles

[00:22:25] where there's just so much excess capacity into those new industries. That that's interesting. Yeah, so if I were a European chemical producer, for example, I would be very nervous about next year. Hope you're enjoying today's interview. Rare earth metals are the hidden backbone of modern technology and defense. They power everything from smartphones and electric vehicles to wind turbines and fighter jets. Countries around the world are racing to build their own secure supply chains, driving investment into the companies best positioned to reshape this sector. Investors can gain exposure to these critical materials through the VanEck Rare Earth and Strategic Metals ETF, ticker REMX. Go to vaneck.com/remxjack to learn more. That's vaneck.com/remxjack. Now back to the interview. So Michael, how can other countries which are dealing with the excess supply of China? There's not enough demand in China. China exports that that differential to the rest of the world. How has the rest of the world been dealing with that imbalance? What have you made of, let's

[00:23:25] just say the US attempts to deal with that excess supply issue from China? And what is your optimal view and you know, if if you were running global trade policy? There hasn't been an adjustment. If you look at the Chinese trade surplus, it continues to grow. If you look at the US trade deficit, it also continues to grow. Now many people say, "Yes, but the US deficit with China, the Chinese surplus with the US has contracted a lot." That's nonsense. It's true it's contracted, but it's irrelevant. Because what really matters is trade imbalances at the system level. Bilateral trade imbalances are irrelevant. So as long as the US trade deficit is growing, it's accommodating the growing Chinese trade surplus. So the rest of the world doesn't really care. They're affected a little bit by shifts in trade, but basically they don't really care. Now some people say that's because of transshipment. So the Chinese instead of selling to the United States, sold to

[00:24:28] Vietnam and the Vietnamese sold to the US. That's some of it, but that's not the real story. The real story is an income story. As long as the US continues to import without exporting, then what it's doing is it's creating income outside of the US. So let's say Americans buy more Peruvian fish, right? So Peruvian fishermen have more income. And when you have more income, typically what do you do? You consume it. And some of that consumption comes in the form of imports and some in consumption of domestically produced stuff, which then increases the income of other Peruvians and on and on and you know by the multiplier, the increase in Peruvian exports to the US, in Peruvian fish exports to the US, must be matched by an increase in Peruvian imports, but not necessarily from the US, from anywhere. And it turns out what they're doing with their higher earnings is

[00:25:28] they're buying a Chinese electric vehicle. So at the end of the day, as long as the US deficit continues to grow, it can accommodate the continued growth in the Chinese surplus. Now the last trade numbers we have, which I believe were for August, suggested a contraction in the US deficit. This could be a one-off thing or it could be the beginning of a change. But the point that I would make is that when the US gets its trade deficit under control, that is when it starts to reduce its trade deficit, which it has to do if it's going to re-industrialize, that's when we see the real change in the global trading system, right? Because if the US, which is more than a half of all deficits, reduces its deficit, probably Canada and Australia Canada and the UK will have to do the same thing. And together those three countries account for nearly three quarters of all global deficits. If they reduce their deficits, there's only two ways the world can respond. One

[00:26:31] way is that surplus countries reduce their surpluses or forced to reduce their surpluses, which means basically China, South Korea, Sweden, Taiwan, which would be very painful, or somebody else has to replace the US, right? And when you go through all the somebody else's, it can't be the developing world, it can't be Japan, it can't be India. Basically, it's got to be Europe. And that's why in Europe you're getting such a sense of panic. Because there is a real sense that if they don't get their act together and don't start doing what China has been doing and what the US is starting to do, which is unilaterally to control their external accounts, then Europe will be the big loser in the global rebalance. And what role do tariffs play? What role should tariffs play in this rebalancing? Like you know, a defender of tariffs say, "Okay, Michael, in terms of the problem, you're 100% right that the the US we have way

[00:27:34] too large of a trade deficit. We're going to increase tariffs from 2 to 3% to 15%, 20% and we're going to reduce imports and that and therefore restore order to our national accounts." To what extent is that true? To what degree do you agree with that vision? Tariffs are just a policy tool. They're a transfer. And like all transfers, they can be contractionary or they can be expansionary depending on the condition. Ideally, what you want to do with tariffs is the equivalent of a currency depreciation. So remember in the 1930s, all the countries that could depreciate their currencies depreciated their currencies and all the countries that couldn't implemented tariffs. They're basically equivalents. But how does a currency depreciation work? Well, when you depreciate your currency, you're basically taxing imports and you're subsidizing exports, right? Now, who is the net importer in your

[00:28:34] economy? It's the household sectors. Households are all net imports, right? Well, who are the net exporter? It's the manufacturing sector. So when you raise when you when you depreciate your currency, you're basically taking income from the household sector to subsidize manufacturing. And if you do it right, manufacturing grows more quickly to the extent that even though households have a smaller share, they're still better off, right? This is how tariffs are classically supposed to work. The problem is that that involved that that implies that tariffs should be pretty simple, say like a 30% tariff on all imports, no ifs, ands, or buts, no exceptions. And that's not what we're doing. What we're doing is all of these really complicated bilateral and sectoral tariffs that make no sense. It's like depreciating your currency bilaterally. So I'll depreciate 5% against sterling and 10% against the RMB

[00:29:36] and 6% against the euro and 18% against the Mexican peso. That makes no sense. You can't do that. All that will do is shift currency movements around without really causing a significant reduction in the value of your currency. So, what I would argue is that tariffs can work if properly implemented. They're not being properly implemented. But even then, they're not the best way to do it. The best way to resolve trade imbalances is to go back to Keynes at Bretton Woods and say, "Let's organize a custom union in which countries are not able to run systemic imbalances." Because as Keynes pointed out, as Joan Robinson pointed out, as lots of people, Michael Lind recently in an article pointed out, a trade surplus is a way of externalizing your domestic costs, your domestic imbalances. [clears throat] And what Keynes said is, "No, you can do whatever you want, but if you have a domestic problem, you don't have the right to force it onto your trade partners. You have to resolve it

[00:30:37] domestically." So, one way of doing that is having a custom union in which trade is balanced. If you run persistent surpluses, you get a penalty. That's one way. Uh uh another way of doing it if you can organize a custom union, I would argue, is to restrict capital inflows. Because remember, when a country runs a trade surplus, it has to export excess saving. And the country to which it exports that excess saving must run the corresponding trade deficit, even if the two countries don't trade together. So, when China exports runs a surplus with say Vietnam, but exports its excess saving to the United States, then the United States must run a deficit. And what typically happens is the US runs a deficit with Vietnam, which runs a deficit with China. So, Vietnam is balanced, the US runs a deficit, and China runs the surplus. So, what I would argue is that what we should do is tax the the the

[00:31:39] foreign exports of capital into the United States. An economist by the name of John John Hanson came up with a very good kind of Tobin tax, which he calls the market access charge, which I think is a very good idea. Uh somebody that you may want to consider interviewing. But that would be a really good way of doing it. And then, the the the least good way, because it's so politically contentious, is through, you know, universal tariffs. And the way that definitely doesn't work is through, you know, variegated bilateral tariffs, which is what we've chosen. But I would say many people in Washington understand that. And eventually, I think the US will get its act together on on reducing the trade deficit. >> So, maybe eight months ago, folks in the Trump administration and associated with that world, I think we're speaking favorably about a potential of taxing capital inflows into the US. Now, that's not looking like it's going to happen at all. I actually think it was in a law that was going to be signed, and then it

[00:32:40] was extracted from the law. Perhaps Wall Street had something to do with that. I I I don't know. I don't think it came close to being approved, but I what I can tell you is that more and more people understand why that would work and why that that would be the best way of doing it. Of course, Wall Street would be ferociously opposed, as would owners of movable capital, because the free flow of capital is really great, you know, if you if you're a billionaire or a bank. Uh not so good if you're an American farmer or worker or manufacturer or middle-class saver. >> So, in this world that we live in, not an actual world, but the the world we live in, where we do have tariffs, they are bilateral, do they play any role in reducing trade imbalances between China and the US on a net net basis, or do they stay the same? It's just that the US government get you know, gets a few hundred billion dollars of of taxable income that basically function as a consumption tax, I might say aggressive tax that are you know, disproportionately go on low-income

[00:33:42] folks. But in terms of what we're talking about the trade imbalances, it doesn't >> have that big of a of an impact. Yeah, bilateral tariffs in theory simply don't work. And and my my mentor at Columbia University, Michael Adler, used to threaten to fail any student who even mentioned bilateral imbalances, because imbalances only matter at the systemic level, never at the bilateral level. Now, in practice, they could work to some extent if every country in the world decided to impose bilateral tariffs on one country, say China. In that case, it would work, but clearly that doesn't seem to be happening. So, you know, in my opinion, we're going to need a significant change in trade policy if we're really going to address the US trade deficit and and the deindustrialization of the US economy. Michael, there were a few days in April where US tariff rates on China were extremely extremely high, but then they went back down to 20%, and now with this apparent November truce we have in

[00:34:43] US-China trade relations, I believe that the tariff rate on on China is as low as 10%. But even a 10% tariff, Michael, shouldn't that 10% tariff dis- strongly discourage trade between the US and China? Because isn't so much of manufactured goods produced in China supposedly has a very low profit margin? And you know, the giant industrial parks around you in in Beijing, I you know, normally I thought they operated with a single digit profit margin, margin, and I thought that therefore a 10% tariff would you would be you would be a highly elastic flow of goods. In other words, they would be very sensitive to tariff rates. But it doesn't appear as if that is happening. >> No, for for a couple of reasons. One reason is that you can see adjustment in the currency. So, if you put 10 10% tariffs on all Chinese imports and the Chinese currency goes down, you eliminate them. And in fact, the the renminbi has been weakening substantially, not in nominal terms, but in real terms. Because remember, uh a

[00:35:45] country with lower inflation has a depreciating real currency, all other things being the same. So, the you know, that's quickly wiped out by that. In addition, remember that in China, much of the investment is not going to fund profitable activity. It's going to fund activity. And the purpose of the activity is not to reduce production and to keep employment going. So, many of the companies So, all of the involuted companies, the big problem with involution was not that their profit margins were thin, but that their profit margins were negative. And yet, rather than cut back, they were expanding production, expanding capacity. And so, profits kept dropping and dropping and dropping. They were hugely negative in many cases. So, the thing there is that when an economy when businesses in an economy operate under what's called soft budget constraints, the banking sector is instructed to give them as much funding as they need to cover their losses. Then

[00:36:48] losses don't really matter. That's, you know, that's not going to really affect overall production and the trade imbalances. So far, we've talked about globalization as it's been over the past 40 years and the problems with that globalization. The current trade conflict that we have right now, do you think it's going to give way to new kinds of globalization? If so, what kinds of globalization is that, and what are the potential advantages and disadvantages of that new age globalization? Well, what we're doing is you're simply fulfilling the the the prophecies of economists in the 1930s and 40s who understood trade so much better than we do today. As I said, Joan Robinson said that you can't have these large persistent surpluses without at some point the cost being absorbed by the deficit countries getting so high that the deficit countries end up either opting out of the system or putting trade barriers or something. They have to reverse that. And so, those are the options. The way I see it, we sort of have two ways we can

[00:37:50] go. We can go the way Keynes proposed. And that is restructure the global trading environment so that we eliminate the ability of countries, or at least significantly reduce the ability of countries to use trade surpluses to externalize their domestic problems, in which case we'll have a free trading world with balanced trade driven by comparative advantage in which we see rapid growth. Or we will go in the direction that Joan Robinson warned us about, in which trade collapses as every country withdraws from the global trading system. Rather, I should say every deficit country withdraws from the global trading system, which of course means that the surplus countries also have to withdraw. You know, if if there are no deficits, there can't be any surpluses. So, it's up to us. We can decide in favor of a deglobalization, or we can decide in favor of a much more intelligently constructed globalization. And which way we go, I don't know, but

[00:38:51] those are really the options. The current system cannot continue. So, option one is more intelligent globalization, option two is deglobalization and a and a decline in trade. This the smarter version of globalization that you see with the customs unions and and countries basically are regulating each other's imbalances, maybe on the capital account as well as on the on the trade account. Do you think that that's politically feasible? I mean, isn't the IMF, which obviously exists and has existed for a long time, isn't the I wasn't the IMF originally supposed to serve that function, but it no longer does? And what happens if the IMF says, "Hey China, you're causing these imbalances. You need to do XYZ." And China waffles and says, "Oh, okay. Yeah, well, we'll look into it, and we'll have a report that will come out two years later." And, you know, basically just kick the kick the can down on road. I imagine the same political issues exist with the UN of of the the political power within countries is so much more powerful than political, you know, so-called world government. Um

[00:39:52] >> Right. That's How does that ever get resolved? Well, as I said, we have two options. We can agree to restructure the global trading system to eliminate persistent imbalances. That's going to be very difficult for countries like China, South Korea, perhaps Japan, although they've recently rebalanced, uh Germany, a bunch of others. Or we can we those countries can continue insisting on expanding their their their share of global manufacturing and their trade surpluses, and the rest of the world simply say, "No, we refuse." Trump really didn't start this. Trump is an expression of a of an existing problem. And the fact that I don't think they've really implemented the right policies, and that's clear from the direction of the trade deficit, which continues to grow, just shows that they still haven't figured out how to do it, but they will. And that's why I made that point earlier. If the US gets its act together and reduces its trade deficit. Remember, global imbalances are being absorbed by

[00:40:54] the US, the UK, and Canada. That's basically it. There's a few developing countries like India and Mexico, and they should be running small deficits. Developing countries should be importers of capital. But the really big three that are that are absorbing most of it are advanced countries that shouldn't be doing so. And if they decide, particularly if the US decides that it is no longer going to play that role, then the entire system comes crumbling down. Right? If more than a half of all the deficits in the world decide we are no longer going to run deficits, by definition, more than a half of the surpluses have to disappear. Or somebody else has to replace the US, and frankly speaking, nobody can really replace the US for as long as as it's played that role. You said that is is door number one, more intelligent globalization, or door number two, a collapse in trade, and that the status quo cannot continue. Why do you say the status quo can't continue? Because you can see it in in

[00:41:56] this sort of revolution against the deindustrialization of of the US economy. In fact, if you look at all of the advanced economies, exclude the Norway's, which is basically an oil producer, you can divide them into two groups in two different ways. One way you can divide them is all the countries that run persistent surpluses, right? Uh so, you have uh uh Taiwan, Germany, Japan, South Korea, blah blah blah. And all the countries that run persistent deficits, the United States, France, England, Canada, blah blah blah. And then you divide them another way. All the countries where manufacturing is a higher share of GDP than the global average, and all the countries where it's a lower share. And surprise, surprise, those two groups perfectly overlap. Surplus countries all tend to have high manufacturing shares, and deficit

[00:42:57] countries all tend to have low manufacturing shares. And that's not a coincidence, right? The reason it happens is because trade surpluses are typically created by policies that are aimed at subsidizing manufacturing at the expense of household income. So, you're subsidizing manufacturing, and you're forcing household consumption basically to pay for it. So, not surprisingly, your manufacturing grows faster than your GDP, and your consumption grows more slowly, and so you have to run a trade surplus. Meanwhile, those open economies who don't control their external accounts, they have to accommodate that, and they accommodate it whether they choose to or not, with a reduction in their with manufacturing growing more slowly than GDP, and consumption growing more quickly, right? So, at some point, countries like the United States, and we're seeing it increasingly in England, are saying, "No, we've got to revive manufacturing." But how do you do that?

[00:43:58] If you continue to trade in an open system with countries that subsidize their manufacturing at the expense of consumption, and you don't do the same, your consumption will continue to grow as a share of global GDP, and your manufacturing will continue to contract as a share of GDP. So, the real question is how serious is the US about reviving manufacturing and reindustrializing. If it's serious, and I believe there's a real bipartisan consensus behind that, if it's serious, it will eventually get it right. Remember what what Churchill was supposed to say is supposed to have said. Um he was supposed to have said that the Americans always get it right, but only after choosing all the alternatives. And yeah, that's probably the definition of a democracy. Democracies always adjust, but in a very messy way. And if you believe that, the US will eventually adjust. Michael, give us the rough numbers on Chinese

[00:44:58] consumption as a percentage of GDP. It's been as I know you've said, among the lowest in the world. Has it been increasing over the past 10, 15 years? And is it enough? No. It It It declined from the 1980s when consumption was more or less normal to 2000 when it was among the lowest in the world. And then from 2000 to 2011, when China was cleaning up its banking system, and that's not a coincidence, it collapsed to levels never before seen in history. From 2011 until around 2019, it increased by two or three percentage points. And then since COVID and the years after, it's come down again. Now, all of that has been two or three percentage points up or down, but what does China need? If China were to to increase its consumption share of GDP by 10 percentage points, that's a lot,

[00:45:58] it would still be one of the lowest consuming economies in the world. In fact, very recently, a very prominent Chinese econom- economist acknowledged that China needs to raise the consumption share of GDP by around 10 to 15 percentage points. But here the math becomes interesting, right? Let's say you give China 10 years, which I think is maybe more time than it has, to raise the consumption share of GDP by 10 percentage points, which is probably not enough. Well, you can do the arithmetic. It's really quite simple. It means that you would need consumption to grow faster than GDP by at least 1.9 percentage points. China's having real trouble to get consumption to grow as fast as GDP. So, to get it to grow much faster is not impossible, but it's extremely difficult to figure out how to do that without major transfers that risk undermining

[00:46:59] the economy and and even local government institutions. You said that Chinese consumer debt is not very high. What is it What about that as a solution? About just Chinese banks and non-banks maybe increasing consumer debt. You know, certainly we have a lot of consumer debt in the US, and we have had for, you know, 30 years. Although I actually think consumer debt as a percentage of disposable income is lower than it, you know, has been, but it's it's still very very high. Is is you know, can can can China become a society where you know, credit cards or digital credit cards are are very common? No, because it's not about consuming money, it's about consuming resources, right? So, what you need to do is to increase the amount of resources, of of stuff produced by the Chinese, to increase the amount that is actually consumed. And the problem is, if you do that without increasing production just as quickly, then the only way you can do

[00:48:00] that is by transferring resources away from the business sector. And remember, Chinese businesses are not particularly efficient. They're incredibly competitive, but they're not necessarily efficient. And why are they competitive? Well, if I told you to start an EV factory in whatever, in Canada, and you said, "Yeah, but I don't know anything about EVs." And I said, "Don't worry, I will give you unlimited funding at incredibly low interest rates. I will give you all the workers you want at very low wages relative to their productivity. I will build whatever infrastructure you need. Tell me you need a road, and I'll build the road the next day. And I will give you a huge budget for research and development." Well, eventually you're going to figure out how to do EVs. You may never be very good at producing EVs, but with all of those subsidies, you're going to be damn competitive. So, that's the problem. If Chinese manufacturing

[00:49:01] competitiveness, you know, there are some companies in China that are really great, but when you look at the the funding cost, when you look at wages relative to productivity, when you look at the massive spending on on infrastructure, etc., then it becomes apparent that a lot of these companies are probably competitive not because they're efficient, but because of these enormous direct and indirect subsidies they're receiving. So, what happens when you reverse the subsidies? Well, they may not be nearly as as competitive as they once were. And the problem is that in a country like China, uh manufacturing is huge. It's 28% of GDP, 27% depending on how you count it. It's bigger than the property sector at its peak. By the way, globally manufacturing was around 16% of GDP. So, if you undermine the manufacturing sector, you're causing huge damage to the Chinese economy. You know, in that light, it's worth thinking about Japan, because Japan also had a huge manufacturing sector. Around

[00:50:03] 25, 26, 27% of GDP at its peak in in in 1990, 1991. And it had very low consumption. It took Japan 17 years from its bottom at 2000 at 1991 till 2008 to raise consumption by 10 percentage points. During that time, Japan grew at basically half a percent. And the manufacturing share of the Japanese economy declined by something like eight percentage points. And I would argue that's not an accident. Japanese manufacturing, uh, uh, in the 1980s was world-beating, but it was world-beating for many of the same reasons. Huge subsidies, of which the most important was probably the capital subsidy. And as you started to reverse that, its manufacturing became less and less globally competitive, and it contracted. And it contracted in a way that was consistent with very low growth. And so

[00:51:05] again, I don't think those are all coincidences. So, you're saying that the bigger problem is that is not that Chinese consumption as a percentage of Chinese household income is small, it's that Chinese household income is is small relative to the entire economy. Yeah. The consumption as a share of household income is also also declined, but it probably declined for very rational reasons. Employment prospects have become very, very scary. People are seeing wages decline, et cetera. And so, when things are going badly, you typically reduce your consumption. But the real problem has been that Chinese households retain the lowest share of GDP of any major economy in the world. I mean, maybe if you go to Sudan or a country in civil war, you'll see a lower share. But in a normally functioning economy, it's probably the lowest share ever. Michael, you you you and I you shared some what could be called criticisms of the Chinese economic model or observations. But, you know, one

[00:52:06] thing to me that could be potentially positive is that the amount of deflation in China and the amount of the real estate bubble imploding, which we're the third year of that of that, you know, the prices going down in in the Chinese real estate market. I don't know if the US economy could could handle that without going into a deep recession. And yet, China still seems to be kind of slugging along. Yeah. Slugging along. Because of the surge in debt and their refusal to lower investment. So, if the US were to run into a recession and the government were to say, "Well, we're going to invest massively in producing X, Y, and Z." And everyone said, "Yeah, but no one's buying the stuff." And the government said, "Doesn't matter. We're going to produce it anyway." Then the US also wouldn't slow down. The question is, how sustainable is that? Because when you're doing that, debt is growing much faster than your debt servicing capacity. You know, you're building the famous bridges to nowhere. And as we've seen many, many times before, you can do this for quite a while.

[00:53:06] But at some point, when you run out of debt capacity, then you have a very, very difficult adjustment. So, what you could argue in a way is that there have been typically two ways the world has adjusted to this very high high saving, high investment, high growth model. One way has been the American way. So, people forget in the 1920s, you know, the US had very high saving, very weak domestic demand, huge trade surplus, all of these problems. And how did the US adjust? Well, you've got too much production relative to consumption. You need to close the gap. The US adjusted with a drop in consumption by about 15 to 20% and a collapse in production by about 35%. So, notice what happened. The US adjusted in the form of a severe, severe contraction. Right? Very brutal, very painful, but very quick. The Japanese version was very different. So again, you have too much production relative to the consumption. Japan

[00:54:06] managed to sustain consumption growth. Consumption growth barely dropped after 1991. GDP growth dropped to zero. Right? So, in the case of Japan, you had a much less brutal adjustment, but economically, it was much worse. Japan used to be 17% of the world and, uh, 20 years later, it was 9% of the world. And today, I think it's 5 or 6% of the world. The US never came close to losing that share of global GDP. So, it seems to me historically, those are the two ways you adjust. In theory, there's a third way. So again, production is too high relative to consumption. What if you could get consumption to surge? And this way, you could rebalance without a slowdown in GDP. That's arithmetically possible. It's just that no one has ever done it. And it's very hard to imagine how you would do that without major transfers that would in and of would in of themselves become probably disruptive either politically or or

[00:55:07] economically. But at least it's arithmetically possible, but those are the only three ways. And so, you mentioned, Michael, that China is now transferring the credit growth from the so-called involuted sectors where there's excess capacity to newer sectors such as petrochemicals or less less developed industries like petrochemicals. That's why you you sounded a note of warning about European petrochemical companies. It sounds like you think that's kind of kicking cans down the road. It's still investment, it's not increasing consumption. And it also sounds like >> all of those areas of excess capacity, like steel. The world has too much steel. But if you've got to produce more, it's probably less bad to produce more steel than to produce more solar panels. Because the world is absolutely flooded in solar panels. So, you're not really looking for places where you need to invest. You're looking for places, it seems to me, where additional investment is less damaging than it might be in other in other sectors. It doesn't sound

[00:56:08] like you there's a big change as you see it. Also, you know, let's assume that there's not enough geopolitical will to have a sort of new customs unit. Given that, it kind of sounds like you think we are headed to a world where trade goes down as a percentage of GDP. What is the rough timeline? Or do you anticipate that? And do you think trade is going to go down as a percentage of GDP by GDP just going up and trade staying flat? Or really, do you estimate that there to be a substantial drop in trade that could have some severe recessionary economic consequences? I certainly think that it's going to get worse before it gets better. How it gets worse is very hard to say, because then you've got to predict politics, right? So, you've got to predict what Trump will do. You've got to predict what Xi Jinping will do. You've got to predict, will the Europeans get their act together or not? And I have no ability to predict those things. But what I would argue is that the current system hasn't really changed. It's an unsustainable system. It's in the process of

[00:57:10] with great difficulty trying to change. And it will change ultimately. But I, you know, one of the things, if you look back, this period is a lot like, say, the 1970s or the 1930s. Also periods of great change, great difficulty. Periods during during which democracies looked very bad and lost a lot of their prestige. Ironically, because they were doing exactly what they're good at, which is to adjust. But adjustment is always a horrible process. And if you look at each of those periods, the changes were profound. The world that came out at the end of the period was completely different from the world that came out at the beginning of the period. But the other thing you learn if you read, you know, the history, and I'm sort of a history junkie for these things, is that we'll make a lot of predictions about how the world will look. Almost all of them will be wrong. So, I'm going to save myself the heartache by not making too many predictions, just saying that we're going to go through a difficult adjustment. And, you know,

[00:58:12] it's going to happen one way or another. And Michael, if the Chinese leadership was determined to increase consumption as a percentage of GDP at the expense of everything else, what would those policies be? And why does the current Chinese leadership not do those policies? Well, one policy is to win the lottery, and that's sort of what they're they're they're trying to do. That is, if you invest enough in technology and you keep your fingers crossed, you might get such a major technological breakthrough that you cause a surge in productivity. And if 100% or or or most of that increase in productivity is directed to workers rather than to profits or to taxes, then presumably, you could get a surge in, uh, in in, uh, in in consumption growth that would get you out of the problem. If you look at the if you look at the the the just the sheer numbers that are required, you will realize that this only works if you, you know, if you come in with one of those technological

[00:59:14] breakthroughs that happen once every thousand years. We need a really important technological breakthrough. The other way you could do it, which would be much easier economically, is that local governments in China own a lot of assets. You know, most famously, the most bankrupt province in China, Guizhou, owns the most valuable liquor company in the world, the Maotai. Now, why do you need >> that is a valuable liquor company. Yeah, it's crazy, right? Why do you need to own a liquor company? Why not use the assets of the liquor company to enrich households? So, for example, one Chinese professor proposed every province creates a holding company. They shift all of the assets of their SOEs to the holding company. And then the holding company gives, you know, one share to every man, woman, and child in the province. And so, immediately local governments lose their assets and households become richer. And presumably households will turn some of that into consumption. That's a way you could do it. But when you consider that local

[01:00:16] governments are extremely powerful in large part because of all of the assets they own and control, what you're talking about is really a complete institutional change in the local government system, which may not be a bad thing, but it will be a very difficult thing. So, there's no easy answer. There are answers, but none of them are particularly easy. And the risk is, because none of them are easy, that you do nothing, in which case eventually you're forced into a very disruptive adjustment. >> And Michael, where does AI come into all of this? The US is actually now investing a tremendously large amount of of money, over 1% of GDP a year, into building out these data centers. I think China is actually investing less as as a percentage of GDP. They're trying to focus on efficiency in terms of the models to maximize their output relative to compute rather than to maximize compute itself. I'm wondering, does this change any of of what we were talking about so far? No, it's good for the world, in my opinion, that these two

[01:01:18] countries, and to a lesser extent other countries, are are spending so much on high technology, including AI. Generally, those things increase productivity growth, but they're not big enough to make huge differences in the great imbalances. The vast majority of Chinese, uh a little bit, you know, less true for the US, but still the vast majority of Americans don't work in AI. Uh they work in other things, you know, in China they, you know, mix cement or deliver food on bicycles, stuff like that. And maybe AI will be such a transformational change in productivity growth that it will solve all of our problems. But, you know, I'm old enough to remember so many things that were going to solve all of our problems, and and they just don't seem to. Maybe AI is different, but I let's not I wouldn't bet everything I owned on on AI solving our problems. Why is deflation rampant in China? And is does the Chinese leadership see this deflation as a

[01:02:19] problem, as, you know, many economists, particularly, you know, Keynesian-type economists, see it as a problem because it this deflationary psychology sets in and you cut your prices and you cut your spending and the like? >> Yeah, you know, deflation can be a good thing. If income is growing and prices are dropping, then the real value of income is growing even even more quickly. But prices are not dropping for that reason. They're not dropping because of increases in productivity. Prices are dropping because they're just producing far more stuff than they can possibly buy, right? So, prices are dropping because demand domestic demand is way too weak. They need to export a great deal of that, but the rest of the world is increasingly reluctant to buy it. You know, one of my former students who owns a whole bunch of chemical manufacturing factories in China told me recently that he finally accomplished his great goal, and that is he doesn't sell anything in China. Everything he sells is into Europe or the Middle East. And there was recently

[01:03:19] an article, I forget where, it could have been in in Bloomberg, in which they quoted uh they were talking about steel capacity, and they quoted the head of the steel industry association saying, "Nobody wants to sell in China. You simply cannot make money. Everybody wants to export." It's not the only way you can make money, it's the only way you don't lose money. That just shows you how bad the supply-demand imbalances. And you're saying that an increase in consumer credit couldn't solve this? Because earlier you talked about in the 1990s and the 2000s, there was a tremendous amount of debt creation in China to fund invest in infrastructure projects, but they were good infrastructure projects, and so actually debt as a percentage of GDP went down cuz GDP went up by more. Wouldn't lending consumers money so that they can buy things and that therefore stimulate the economy, wouldn't that be a stimulative thing and maybe return on investment could that could be high, not even for the lending company, but just for the overall economy? >> Sure, it could be. And in fact, the Beijing is even putting a lot of pressure on the banks to increase

[01:04:21] consumer lending. In March, they told the banks to increase consumer lending. And consumer lending has gone up a bit, but here's the problem. Given all of the uncertainty in the economy, most Chinese would rather pay down debt than borrow more. So, you can always increase consumer lending in any country. It's not very difficult. You just have to lower lending standards by enough. There's always somebody, call them foolish, call them optimistic, you know, whatever, there's always somebody who's willing to borrow and and and spend. You may not necessarily want to lend to that person, but if you have to, and if you lower your lending standards enough, you will. But the problem then is that you see a rise in non-performing loans. And we're already seeing that in the Chinese banking system. So, it's not that easy to get people to consume more. The way you do it in China, the way you do it in the US, the way you did it in Spain in the 2000s, is by lowering lending standards. And that may end up creating problems in the future. >> And in a on October 1st, there was a new

[01:05:23] enforcement of a law that may have already been on the books about lending at interest rates above 24%. I know above 36% is literally legal, but 24% to 36% was a gray area, and now they're increasing enforcement on that 24 that that that gray area zone. So, it's it's not Yeah, I don't see I don't I don't see how you can borrow at 24% for productive reasons. It's, you know, that's that's what Minsky called the you know, a kind of Ponzi borrowing. You really don't want your economy to go in that direction. That's non-productive borrowing. Why is Chinese involvement in the Chinese equity market so low? You know, in the US, we have a stock culture of many people, retail investors, institutional investors, are heavily allocated to equities, and particularly now. In China, you know, the they much prefer real estate. Is, you know, I if if I was a Chinese citizen and I I could get 1% on my deposits, or I could buy bonds that yield 2%, or I

[01:06:25] could invest in, you know, Chinese equities, some of which are high quality, some of which have growing earnings, and they have an earnings yield probably four times that of what I could get on a bond, I might be overweight Chinese equities and and not be in in cash or real estate. Why is it that so many Chinese investors and citizens don't don't have that view? >> Part of it is because they've done it in the past and the market shoots up, and then when it shoots down, you know, it's incredible how quickly it can come down. And what typically happens is that the more sophisticated investors have sold earlier in the cycle, and the less sophisticated have bought later in the cycle. So, basically, it's a huge transfer of income. So, a lot of Chinese are very nervous about the stock market, but that's starting to happen. And you're seeing, for example, banks did really well because they have high dividends. People are now starting to buy on dividends, but people are still very nervous. But also remember, the Chinese stock market is quite small. So, in the US, corporate finance is roughly 1/3

[01:07:27] equity, 1/3 bonds, and 1/3 bank loans, right? In China, bank loans are more than 90% of all corporate finance. Very little comes from equity. So, it's a very small market. Um and it, you know, it's it's it's never going to matter as much as it does in the US. And it certainly will never matter as much as the real estate market mattered in China. What's your outlook on the, let's call it the medium term, over the next few years of the Chinese economy? We have your long-term view, but in in the in the middle term, what's your outlook of the Chinese economy? I I know in the first interview we do we did 2 years ago, you actually said that you thought Chinese growth would come in a little bit above expectations, so more bullish than than, you know, Princeton view. What about now? You know, what I'm really hoping in the summer, I would have told you growth next year is going to be 5% because that'll be the target. Today, I'm starting to think that it may be 4.5%. They may lower the target.

[01:08:28] Basically, as long as they have debt capacity and are willing to make bad investment, non-productive investment, and both is true both are true, they can achieve any target they want. So, the lower the target, the better for China over the long term. The higher the target, the more rapid the growth in debt. China has the fast China has much more debt than the US. A lot of people don't know this. Chinese debt to GDP overall is higher than in the US, but more importantly, it's growing much much faster. It's among the fastest-growing debt burdens we've ever seen. And last year and this year are among the highest growth rates we've ever seen. So, that's the real constraint. If you have infinite debt capacity, then there'll never be a problem. But if you had infinite debt capacity, it would be a trivial matter to make everyone a millionaire overnight. Uh you don't have infinite debt capacity. So, the question is, when do you reach the limits of your debt capacity? Really hard to say because there's so many moving parts. It

[01:09:28] depends on the structure of debt, the control over the financial system, external events, the confidence levels, etc. etc. All I can tell you is that they don't have infinite debt capacity. And when they reach the limit, that will be a very difficult adjustment. Hopefully, they will decide to adjust before they reach the limit, which is for example, what what Japan did in 1991, 1990. Brazil, on the other hand, didn't. It discovered what the limit was in 1982-83, and of course, the '80s were absolute disaster for Brazil, a huge contraction in the economy. And those are sort of the models I think about. Um you want to rein in debt before you reach your debt capacity limit. Could the debt capacity of China last forever? Because I believe it's the case, correct me if I'm wrong, that China is does not have a huge percentage of debts that are denominated in foreign currency. So, most of the debt is financed in yuan. So, if there ever was a financing problem, the

[01:10:30] Chinese Central Bank just could buy a bunch of government debt and local government debt as well. Is that true? Yes and no. People think the problem the problem with debt is that you might have a financial crisis. And that's not true. The problem with debt is that it typically represents a huge amount of misallocated investment that is finally recognized and allocated. When you look at the two biggest debt crises, if you like, of the last 100 years, basically the United States in the 1930s and Japan after 1991, neither of them had any external debt. They were all big exporters of capital. All of their debt was domestic domestic debt uh in local currency. And yet, they both suffered tremendously from that debt. The thing is that you you know, I I there's a lot of confusion here. When I say that you run out of debt capacity, people say, "No, you don't have to default." Running out of debt capacity doesn't mean you default. Running out of debt capacity means that the transfers

[01:11:32] required to balance the low return on the asset side of the balance sheet and the high debt servicing costs start to undermine the economy. Right? So, if you borrow $100 and invest it in things that are, you know, that are worth $80, you're not going to get richer and richer, you're going to get poorer and poorer. As long as you can pretend it's worth $100 and roll it over, you won't feel poor. But at some point, the gap between the two is so great that the only way you can service the debt is with huge transfers. And it's those transfers that undermine the economy. I think most economists don't really understand this. Uh they think the problem with debt is that you might default. And so, if you can guarantee no default, then hey, no problem. You have infinite debt capacity. Not true. If you had infinite debt capacity, literally, it would be a trivial thing to to figure out how to

[01:12:33] make everyone in your country a millionaire, a real millionaire, right? And clearly, that can't happen. Michael, earlier you said that tariffs are not going to solve the imbalances between the US and the rest of the world, between China and the rest of the world. Badly structured tariffs. Tariffs could, if they were correctly structured. But you don't think that the current tariffs are. No, clearly not. So, what is the impact of these tariffs going to be? All they do is they shift trade around. That's why I used that example of depreciating your currency on a bilateral basis. So, let's say there are three currencies, euro, yen, and dollars. And I decide that I don't want Japanese people buying US assets. So, I depreciate the dollar against the yen by whatever, 50%, but I don't depreciate it against the euro. Now, I don't know how you could possibly do that, but imagine I did that. Would Japanese people stop buying dollars? No, what they would do is they would buy euros and then use the euros

[01:13:34] to buy dollars. So, nothing would happen. It's just the direction of the flows would change. And that's basically what we've seen in global trade because of all of these bilateral and sectoral tariffs, which have no net impact on systemically. What ends up happening is that instead of, you know, selling from A to B, you sell from A to C and from C to B. That's what's happened in the world. But otherwise, the US deficit continues to accommodate the growth in the in the Chinese surplus. There's no there's been no fundamental change. But what about these deals or announced deals that President Trump has announced where these apparently very large numbers of of money, trillions of dollars, is going to be invested into the United States. You know, let's say that it's some of it is a exaggeration and we divide the real number by four, that would, you know, maybe a a trillion dollars of foreign direct investment over the next decade. Is that going to improve manufacturing and improve the the trade imbalance? >> No. No, it's totally silly. Look, if

[01:14:36] Americans if there were good investment opportunities in the US, Americans would have funded them, right? It's very America American businesses sit on huge piles of cash. And it's very easy to borrow money either from funds or from banks. The problem is that there aren't good investment opportunities because domestic demand is too weak. The ECB did a study in Europe 2 weeks ago that found exactly the same thing. The reason Europeans are not investing is not because they don't have the money, it's because they don't have the demand. There's no point in investing. So, when you tell, say, the Japanese, "Come along and invest in the US," what the hell are they going to do? Maybe they can buy a trillion dollars worth of US government bonds, but so what? If businesses needed capital, they could easily gain access to the capital. They don't need capital because they don't see any reason for investing. So, the only way you could get this to work is if you say, "Look, you know, foreigners, we need you to invest really stupidly in our country.

[01:15:37] Invest to lose money." In that case, yeah, you'll create some growth in the US and they'll lose money. You know, great. But in that case, the benefit to the US is not the trillion dollars, it's the amount of money they're willing to lose. It's really silly. The US doesn't need foreign capital. Europe doesn't need foreign capital. Um uh what they need is more demand. That's what will drive up investment. Ironically, the more foreigners invest in the US, the stronger the dollar and the less competitive US manufacturing becomes. So, the less likely US manufacturers are to invest. You know, there's no reason to invest if your currency is appreciating and you're you're no longer competitive. And so, I'm worried about that. I've seen you post on on Twitter that Twitter that Chinese debt is continuing to rise quickly with total social financing rising rising by 8.7%. How much of that is at all is true stimulus to people and households that's

[01:16:39] going to boost consumption, and how much of it is unproductive infrastructure investments that is so-called bad growth as opposed to good growth? Very little is the former. I mean, the amount that went to consumption is quite low, and and from what the banks are telling us, a lot of that was bad investment in bad lending to consumption. But most of it goes into the investment side through the central government, local governments, or or large businesses, or SOEs. What's interesting is that China is sort of the mirror image of the US. In the US, we need debt to continue rising in order to drive up consumption to make up for the amount of demand that flows abroad through the trade deficit. In China, they need rapidly growing debt, but for a completely different reason, to drive up investment in order to make up for or in order to accommodate the huge and growing Chinese trade surplus. So, the US has soaring debt to support consumption. China has soaring debt to

[01:17:40] support production. The two countries are sort of perfectly matched, and both of them getting into debt trouble. We need to break That's why I say the system is unsustainable. It needs to be broken. Not just for the good of the US, but also for the good of China. Michael, thank you so much for for joining us. We'll leave it there. People could find you on Twitter and X at Michael X Pettis, and you you share your writings at the Carnegie Endowment, where we will link to that as well. Thank you, everyone, for listening. Please leave a rating and review on for Monetary Matters on Apple Podcasts and Spotify, as well as subscribe to the Monetary Matters YouTube channel. Thank you. Thanks very much, Jack. Bye-bye. Thanks for tuning in. Looking into REMX by VanEck, head to vaneck.com/remxjack to learn more. That's vaneck.com/remxjack. Until next time. Thank you. Just close the doors.
