[00:00:00] Hi, welcome back. I know I haven't been very active, at least in terms of posting and putting up videos for the last couple of months, but I've had more important things on my mind. Now, I'm going to leave you with that kind of unfinish because I'll come back and talk at the end of this session about what I have or what I'm doing that's much more critical than looking at the market and timing the market. But this particular session, I want to focus on something that happened a couple of weeks ago. Jerome Powell, the Fed chair, was asked about stock prices and whether he thought stocks were in a bubble. And he said, you know, that stocks were fairly highly valued. I mean, in market strategy talk, this is weasel talk because basically it's neither here nor there. It doesn't say stocks are overpriced, but it clearly he was sending the message. They're pretty richly priced. And that brought to me brought me to you know reminded me of something I actually saw in person almost 30 years ago in 1996.

[00:01:02] Alan Greenspan then the Fed chair used the words irrational exuberance to describe the market as he saw it then. And this was of course in the midst of the dotcom boom. And those words have become legendary partly because Robert Schiller then wrote a cautionary book on market bubbles with that title. And it was at the start of this period when we started giving central bankers powers that they really don't possess, powers to determine what the economy will do and where the market's going to go. So as I listened to Jerome Powell talk about a fairly highly valued market, I was reminded of this debate that we've seen going on all around us. Are stocks in a bubble? Are they overpriced? I'm going to perhaps surprise you because many of you know I'm not a market dimemer by saying that Paul is probably right in saying stocks are richly priced. But I'm also going to tell you why I'm not going to do much about it. Now why even if you believe stocks are overpriced, it doesn't automatically follow that you need to go out and sell

[00:02:03] everything and head for the hills. So let's set this up by first looking at what's happened in 2025. It's been an extraordinary year. If you just read the news, the Wall Street Journal, the Financial Times, just watch the Financial News. It's been an eventful year, a scary year. Tariffs and talk about inflation and the economy and politics, economics. You know, based on the news, you'd say this is going to be a terrible year for stocks. And it started off as a pretty bad year, especially in March and April. But if you look through September 30th of 2025, stocks have made and and these are just US equities. I'll come back and talk about global equities. US equities have made almost a miraculous comeback. In fact, over the first 9 months of this year, the S&P 500 is about up about 13.7%. So even if we stop right here, this would be a really good year for stocks and the NASDAQ is up 17.3%.

[00:03:03] It's true that through the first quarter, the S&P 500 ran ahead of the NASDAQ, but the NASDAQ is back in the saddle now across the first nine months. Now, of course, these are indices. They might they might not tell you much about what's happening underneath. So, I took a deeper look at US equities. I broke them down by a sector. These are the S&P 500 sectors. And overall, US equities are up about 13.76%. These are all publicly traded US equities. 5,786 uh firms in my sample. So these are any company where the market cap is in here. But if you look across sectors, you can see it's been a wildly divergent year. The two best performing sectors are technology and you're not surprised by that and communication services. And I'll talk a little bit more about why that's jumped to the top. Utilities have had a pretty good year but you can see five sectors which have lagged. The worst has been you know the worst two have been consumer staples and healthcare which have been pretty much

[00:04:03] flat for the year. Real estate has not done well. You know energy has struggled and consumer discretionary has not done well and we can tell stories about each of these. Financials and industrials and and materials have kind of kept up with the market. clearly a a market overall that's done well but wildly different depending on what sectors you're looking at. Now I did mention communication services and you're saying why is that up? Well, it turns out that two of the mag seven which is going to be my next topic of conversation and the alphabet and meta are treated by S&P as communication service companies and they did well and they carried that sector up to a 22.29% return. Now, since I brought up the Mag 7, let's take a look at the Mag 7. I mean, they've dominated the news stories for the last and you know, anytime you look at investment news, they're up there. The Mag 7, of course, are Apple, Nvidia, Microsoft, Alphabet, Amazon, Meta, and Tesla. And if you look, and what I've done in this table is actually looked at what they've done

[00:05:05] each year in 2022, 2023, and 20 or in the three quarters of 2025. Let's start with the collective news. In 2023, the MAG 7 alone saw their market cap increase by $5.1 trillion. We have to get used to trillions when you talk about the market cap. They accounted for almost 55% of the increase of market cap of all 5,800 US companies. If you look at 2024, they went up by another 5.6 trillion, almost 50% of the increase in value equity. When you looked at 2025, when you look at the first quarter, they had perhaps for the first time in a long time, a really bad quarter. They lost almost 2.7 trillion in market cap. They dropped to about 26%. In terms of the overall So, if you look at as a percentage of of the total market coming into 2025, the max 7 were about 29%. Up at the end of the first

[00:06:05] quarter, it drop back to 26%. I heard talk of this is the end. the Mac 7 are going to have to retreat. And in the last two quarters, they're back again. In fact, collectively in 2025, they've accounted for $2.8 billion trillion increase in market cap and about 52% of the increase of all US equities. In fact, they're now a higher percentage of all US equities than they were at the start of the year. So if you're waiting for the MAX 7 to to to to wave, this has not been this hasn't happened yet this year. It could still happen, but it hasn't happened yet. Now I also looked at three other sliced and diced US equities and I looked at three other dimensions on which uh to see if 2025 was different from previous years. One is I broke companies down based on market cap at the start of 2025, not 2024. That's a mistake. start of 2025 into the small companies and large companies. I broke them down to

[00:07:06] the bottom and the top desktop and small companies for the first time in a long time have outperformed larger companies. The bottom half US companies in terms of market cap were up 19.75% in 2025 and the top 50% were up only 13.7%. Yeah. Now much of that has happened in the third quarter. The third quarter has been a really good re good good good period for small cap stocks perhaps catching up with the rest of the market. I also looked at stocks broken down by price to book kind of a rough and lazy proxy for value stocks. This is again a low price to book ratios which dominated markets for the last century have struggled for the last 10 15 or 20 years and during 2025 they seem to have made a bit of a comeback. the bottom 50% in terms of price to book did better than the top 50%. But almost all of that happened in the first quarter. In the second and third quarters, high price to

[00:08:06] book stocks are back again. So if you're a value investor waiting for the coming back of value, first quarter, you might have said we're back again, but the second and third quarters have set you back. I also looked at at stocks based on the percentage price change in 2024. This is momentum. And here again, now if you look at momentum stocks which have dominated markets for the last decade, momentum stocks have done well again in 2025. Again, after a rough first quarter, they're back again. So overall, small cap stocks have made a bit of a comeback. Value stocks have have now started the year well, but they've struggled since. And momentum has is is back into the into the saddle as as as the dominant factor driving stock prices. Now stepping back from the US looking at global equities we'll come back and take a look at global equities but before we go there let's take a look at what interest rates did during the year now as the year that I described as a year with all kinds of shocks right not just

[00:09:07] political shocks and tariff shocks and economic shocks and inflation shocks the story with US treasuries is how little they've changed over the course of the year if you take a look at across maturities 3 month through 30-year rates on September 30th of 2025 look very similar to rates at the start of the year. Three-month rates are down a little bit. 30-year rates are pretty stagnant. 10ear rates are down. 2-year rates are down. So, if nothing else, the yield curve has become a slightly more upward sloping. But the surprising thing is rates haven't moved more. And in fact, on May 16th of 2025, if you'd been reading the news, you probably read about the Moody's downgrade of the US and was talking about what will this do to interest rates and the answer is not much. In fact, focusing just on the Moody's downgrade and the talk about what did it do to default risk in the US. I focused on the US 5-year sovereign sp. It's a market set measure for what the market thinks the default risk in the US is.

[00:10:09] And if you look at September 30th versus the start of the year, not much has happened to this. It's true rates spiked, but they spiked after the tariff shock on March 31st and April, not after the Moody's downgrade. The Moody's downgrade itself seemed to come as no surprise to markets. Perhaps because Moody's was the last of the three ratings agencies to act lower the US rating from AAA. So overall, not much has happened to US Treasury rates over the year in spite of all of the news. In fact, staying with interest rates and looking at corporate default spreads. The story remains the same. Not much happened here. I've looked at corporate default spreads AAA all the way down to high yield. And again, the big movement happened in April right after the tariff, but much of that seems to have dissipated by September. So, US equities have had a good year, though dispared impacts across sectors. Interest rates don't seem to have done much. Let's talk about global equities. I'm going to start with a very simplistic comparison

[00:11:11] of the S&P 500 against the MSCI global equity index. And over the course of the year, the global equity index is up about 16.6%. It's done better than the S&P 500. This is a turnaround from what we've seen for the last 15 years where the S&P 500's run ahead of the global equity index, but much of that outperformance in global equities happened in the first quarter. If you take the first quarter out, the S&P 500 is back up on top. So again, the first quarter seems to be an aberration. Breaking down global equities by region, the G global equities collectively were up 16.8%. The US lag global equities is up only 13.8%. See the green parts of the world now, Canada, China, EU, Eastern Europe, you know, Latin, much of that, you know. So if you look at they've outperformed not just the US but look but a a a large part of their outperformance and these are returns in dollar terms comes in the

[00:12:11] fact that the dollar has weakened over the year. The worst performing market in the year and it's no contest has been India down 3.15% in US dollar terms can talk about again the tariff effect and other factors but I think India did come into 2025 as the most overpriced market in the world and some of this might just be a leveling off. Africa and the Middle East has not done well either. But overall, you can see that much of the world has outperformed the US this in in 2025. But much of that outperformance again happened in the first quarter. So now we're ready to ask the question, are US equities overpriced? In fact, let's set the table. When you look at a market and say, is it over or underpriced? You need a metric. Okay? And the metrics can range from very simplistic incomplete metrics to more complex complete metrics. Let's take the most simplistic metric of overpricing. If stocks are up a lot and especially over a short period, they must be overpriced. That's the view that at

[00:13:14] least some investors have. If stock prices go up a lot and it's over a short period, they must be overpriced. It's simplistic because not factoring that other things might explain the rise in prices, especially earnings. So if you bring earnings into the mix, there's a simple fix, right? You're no longer looking at stock prices alone, you're looking at stock prices relative to earnings, price earnings ratios. And there the metric becomes if P ratios are really high relative to some norm historic averages, then stocks are overpriced. So you've now brought earnings to the mix a little more complete than just looking at stock prices. The problem with focusing just on PE ratios, if you take your money out of stocks, you've got to invest them elsewhere. It doesn't factor in the alternative. You say, "How do I bring it in?" There's a simple way to bring it in. Instead of looking at the PE ratio, invert it. It's called the earnings yield and compare the earnings yield to what you can make on US treasuries. Why that comparison? because you take your money out of stocks, invest it in

[00:14:15] something long-term, especially treasury bonds, that's a rate you will make. That difference in the earnings price ratio and the T-bond rate becomes a metric you can use to determine whether stocks are over or underpriced, but it's still not quite complete, right? And here's why. It doesn't factor in growth. A high growth market should be priced higher. To bring growth into the equation, you got to bring its pluses and minuses. The plus of growth is it makes your earnings get larger in future years. The minus of growth is it leads you to have to set aside some of your earnings or a big chunk of your earnings into reinvestment to deliver that growth. You go from earnings to cash flows, you bring in growth. You're now in the intrinsic value space. There the argument is if stock prices are too high given the intrinsic value that stocks are overpriced. four different metrics from least complete to most complete with different assumptions. Let's take each of the four and see where stock prices US equities are right

[00:15:16] now. Now, now often when people complain about the market after a bad week or a bad month, I suggest they step back and gain some perspective. It's been an astonishing 15 years for US equities, perhaps the best 15 years in US equity history. US equities have are up more than 500% in the last 15 years. Now if invested $100 in 2010 would be worth 660 in September 2025 with price appreciation dividends reinvestment. It's return of 18.74% a year. You said as compared to what the compounded annual return on stocks between 1927 and 2024 in the US was 9.94%. We've earned almost twice that on an annual basis for the last 15 years. For some investors, this alone is enough to conclude that US stocks are overpriced. Say, how can stocks go up this much and not be overpriced?

[00:16:17] Okay, that's a reasonable point. But let's bring in the earnings effect. In this graph, I look at the PE ratio now. And of course, you can look at the com boom, a P ratio spike. But if you take that 1999 out of the mix and you look at PE ratios today, now three versions of it. A trailing PE where you take the market in price today and divide by the earnings in the last 12 months. A normalized PE where you take the price today and divide by the average earnings over the last 10 years. That allows for some smoothing. and a chilipe or a cape where you take the price today and divide by the average earnings over the last 10 years adjusted for inflation because in earnings 10 years ago is worth more in today's terms on every single measure of PE we're at numbers we haven't seen historically in September 2025 you take a look at the trailing P the normalized P and the K they're all at levels we haven't seen in in at least in in in in in the last 100 years of US

[00:17:19] stocks. So stocks look overpriced by just looking at the pricing. They look overpriced in a PE ratio basis. But for a portion of this period between 2011 and 20, the way we justified high PE ratios was where else are we going to go? Remember in that period if you took the money out of stocks and you put them in bonds, you made 2%. If you put them in T- bills, you made almost nothing. So to bring in that alternative, I inverted the PE ratio and therefore the green line here is my earnings yield, the earnings to price ratio and compared with the T- bond rate. So remember that last decade where I talked about why you might pay a high multiple of earnings. T- bond rates were low. So you could say my earnings to price ratio even though it's lower than it's been historically is still higher than the T- bond rate. Well, since 2022, that reason is gone. The fig leak was gone because t- bond rates are now back above 4%. So in the last couple of years you compare the earnings to price ratio to the t- bond rate were struggling. In fact in 2020 at

[00:18:20] the end of 2024 the earnings yield for the US was 4.14%. The t- bond rate is 4.58%. For some people the fact that the earnings yield is less than the 10ear t- bond rate is by itself an overpricing indicator. That's become slightly better in September of 2025. Not because the earnings yield has gone up. It's actually gone down, but because the T- bond rate has dropped from 4.58 to 4.16%. We're still the earnings yield is still lower than the T- bond rate, but not by as much. But again, on this metric, you could argue stocks are overpriced. Note though, the earnings to price ratio compared to the T- bond rate has not been a great market timing tool. In fact, during the 1990s, one of the great decades for US stocks, every year kept you out of stocks. The earnings yield was lower than the Tond 93, 94, '95. So, what's how do you get the full story? You know, by now you know where I'm going. I'm an intrinsic value believer. And ultimately, the intrinsic value of the market can be written as

[00:19:21] the present value, the expected cash flows you would get in the market. You're saying as opposed to what we looked at earnings before, right? Earnings are not cash flows because some of those earnings have to be reinvested to deliver growth and because we're looking at the future that growth is going to help you in future years. So the intrinsic value of the market is the present value of expected cash flows over time discounted back at what at a rate that you'd require to make on equities as an asset class which is so if you think about what goes into it there'll be a risk-free rate or a US treasury rate for much of that period and an equity risk premium. Equity risk premiums reflect your hopes and fears. So that's an intrinsic value and you think how the heck am I going to use that to decide whether stocks are over or underpriced. There are two ways you could. One is you can solve for an internal rate of return. The discount rate that makes the present value your expected cash flow is equal to the level of the market. That's going to give you a market implied expected return on stocks. You subtract out the T-bond rate from that. You're going to get an equity

[00:20:22] risk premium. That's what people are pricing in and as as an expectation. And here's how it becomes a market timing tool. If that equity risk premium looks too low to you, stocks are overpriced. People are not charging enough of a premium. If it looks too high to you, stocks are are underpriced. That's one way to do it. The other is to take the present is to assume a certain equity risk premium. may be based in history, maybe based on your gut and value the index using that assumed premium. You come up with an intrinsic value for the index, you compare to the level of the index. If the intrinsic value is greater than the level of the index, the stocks are undervalued. And if the reverse is true, they're overvalued. As some of you know, I do compute the implied equity risk for the S&P 500 at the start of every month. At the end at the at the end of September 2025 on October 1st of 2025, the implied equity risk premium for the S&P 500 was 4.01%. You're saying, "Was that a high number,

[00:21:22] a low number?" Well, I can give you some perspective because I've been computing these implied equity risk premiums for a long time. And I've actually reverse engineered what that number would have looked like going back all the way to 1960. The average implied equity risk premium from 1960 through 2025 has been about 4.25%. 4.01% is lower. That's a little worrying and it's much lower than what it's been between 2015 and 2024. So if you argue that if you look at the last decade, maybe since the last crisis, we're looking at premium that is too low. Again, that would suggest stocks are overpriced. No, if you're a little more sanguin and say I'm going to go back and look at the entire period, you're still lower than that 4.25%. So the bottom line is the implied equity risk premium is again if not sending up a flag as bad as it was. In fact, in in at the peak of the dotcom boom, the implied premium hit 2%. That was a

[00:22:23] bubble. We're not quite there yet, but it's still worrying. I also computed the intrinsic value of the index assuming that 4.25 25% historical premium is a reasonable premium. That gives me a value for the index of 5,938. That's just, you know, the the decimal points are just for show. That gives me a value for the index about 12.6% lower than the level of the index. Now, so on an intrinsic value basis, stocks look overvalued. So on every metric stocks are suggesting or so if you ask me what I thought about Pow's fairly highly valued market statement I think every metric would back it up. We are richly priced by historical standards and every one of these metrics if you have mean reversion to historic norms we're going to get a correction. Now we can debate how big that correction will be depending on what that norm is. But even if you accept the fact that stocks

[00:23:23] are overpriced in in legal terms, let's say let's stipulate stocks are overpriced. What can you do about it? There are four cho there are actually five choices you have right there's four. If you think about doing something you you can do nothing, right? Just do what you always do. The second and this is the mildest reaction is while you don't change your asset allocation or your holdings in your portfolio you when you bring new cash in your portfolio leave it as cash. So your cash balance as a percent of your portfolio increases. In fact many equity mutual fund managers this is the statistic that captures how bullish a bears they are. You could change your asset allocation mix from what and let's say your standard mix is 60% equities, 40% bonds because that's what your risk aversion and your age leads you to pay. You might decide that if you stocks are overpriced, you might reduce that to 40% equity or 20% equity or even go to 0% equity. You could change the mix of equity and debt and even bring in cash into that mix depending on your views of

[00:24:25] the market. Slightly more aggressive than just building cash. You could buy protection. What does that mean? You leave your asset allocation mix and your holdings what they are, but you use puts or you buy if you think stocks are overpriced, you buy puts on the index or sell futures in the index to protect yourself. It's an expensive way to run a portfolio because you got to do this in every period or and if this is the most aggressive way is you can try to make a leverage bet on a correction. Go buy call options if you think stocks are undervalued. Buy put options. Now, and this is not to protect yourself. You're trying to make money on the market correction. So, do nothing all the way to making leverage by essentially ranging the spectrum on market timing. I am not a market timer and I'll talk a little bit about why. But if you are a market timer and you decide that you're going to try market timing, there are three things you need to do. First is you need to pick a pricing metric. You're going to base it on P ratios, capes, earnings to price versus T- bond

[00:25:26] rates, or even equity risk premiums. But that's not sufficient. You got to create an action rule. I know a lot of people when they talk about these pricing metrics working use correlations or regressions over time to show you that they work. Hey, remember as a port as an investor, you don't make money on correlations or regressions. You got to have an action plan. You got to tell me what your action rule is. So let's take an example. Let's suppose cape is your pricing metric. You got to tell me when you will act. If the cape drops more than 25% from a historic median 50%, what is it going what's the trigger going to be for you to act? And you have to be specific about it. And then you're going to tell me what you will do when you act. you know, are you going to go from 60% equity to 80% equity or 60% equity to 100% if stocks are underpriced or the reverse of stocks are overpriced? And you need to be specific. You're saying why? Because to test whether a back test is ruled, I need specifics, not generalities. So, let's take an

[00:26:28] example. Let's use the Schiller P as our basis because there's so much talk about it. I mean, you got a Nobel Prize for doing it, right? There must be something to it. Let's say I compute a median over the prior 50 years. If the current P cape is 25% lower than the median, I increase my equity portion. So let's say my standard is 6040. I will leave it at 6040. If the PE ratio is within 25% of the median, but if it's more than 25% lower, stocks are underpriced, I increase the equity portion. If the PE ratio is 25% higher, then I inc reduce the equity portion. This is just one particular strategy. And then I check for my market timing payoff. Look at what my annual returns would have been over the period w with the market timing versus doing nothing. I tried this with that specific strategy 25% threshold and going from 6040 to 8020 if I am bullish or 4060 if I'm bearish.

[00:27:29] My returns with the market timing over the entire century would have been 9.06% a year. My returns if I just left it at 6040 every year would have been 9.1%. I'd have actually lost 0.04%. And I'm being charitable here because I'm not factoring in the higher taxes and the transactions cost you wouldn't have paid for me. It's true between 25 and 74 there's a mild payoff. You have earned about.33% more. But in the last 50 years I'd have earned 41% less trying to time markets using cape ratios. in that strategy. Now, of course, this is one strategy. I tried a few more. I tried different thresholds. 10% 10% less than the median, you you buy 10% higher than the median, it's a little more active market timing. I also tried, you know, 50% much less active. So, P ratios dropped. So, you know, the PE ratios be 50% below than the median

[00:28:30] for me to buy 50% higher than to sell. I also checked a more aggressive action plan where if stocks are underpriced I go to 100% equities and stocks overpriced I sell all equities. There wasn't a single one of these timing strategies which have delivered value for me in the last 50 years and that's before before transactions cost. That's the reason I don't try to time markets. So when people ask me whether I have a market view, I say of course everybody does. Even people who claim not to be market timers do. The problem I have is converting that market timing view into returns. Doesn't work for me. It doesn't work for me. It doesn't work for me because I can't find a way to make it work. Now I'm not saying you shouldn't try market timing. Perhaps I haven't found a good enough strategy or perhap my metric is off. I encourage you though that if you decide to go with market timing that you

[00:29:31] be careful about the metric you pick. More complete metrics are better than less complete metrics. Make sure you're testing an action plan not just correlate looking at correlations and regressions. And back test your plan and be realistic with taxes and transactions cost to see if it works for you. And if it does, all the more power to you. Go out and time markets. You will do much better than I than I will because there is a payoff to good market timing. Right now though, I think US equities are richly priced. I will leave it at that term. No, I'll I'll put myself in the company of Jerome Powell. But remember, timing is the game. We talked about Alan Greenspan's irrational exuberance talk. You say, "I should have listened to him." If you'd listened to him in 1996, which is when he said, and stayed out of equities through 2001, you'd have done worse than somebody who never listened to him and went through the dotcom bust. That's the problem with

[00:30:31] timing is not only do you have to time markets, you got to get the timing of your actions right to make money. And if it works for you, as I said, try it out. And if it doesn't, go back to stock picking. I did mention at the start of this session that um I've not been very active for the last couple of months because I've had more important things on my on my mind and I promised you I would tell you what those were. You're probably wondering what's what's what is this critical thing that's that's keeping him occupied. Is it a another book? Is he writing a paper? Is he doing research? None of the above. I've been spending the last couple of months looking after my 3-month-old now five-month-old granddaughter and I and um you know I my entire day is structured around when she sleeps, when she eats, you know, and in many ways it's healthier than watching CNBC all day. Kind of brings you back to basics, the things that truly matter. I mean, my my granddaughter looks, you know, reminds me every day that, you know,

[00:31:33] there are far more critical things than than investing and making money on markets. And I'm glad for that perspective. In fact, as many of you might know, I'm taking a sbatical and spending the rest of this academic year through May of 2026 continuing to look after my granddaughter. And I cannot think of anything else I would do that would give me more joy. But thank you very much. And I will try to be active during this period. If I can get a break from the eating, sleeping, keeping her happy and to write something, I will try to do so. But it's going to be on her terms. She's the cutest boss I've ever had, but she's unpredictable and um it is what it is. Take care and have a good day.
