[00:00:00] It’s Thanksgiving weekend in the United States, which kicks off a holiday season in which Americans eat turkey and watch films about bank runs. These are American traditions. In keeping with this tradition, CNBC reported last week that thousands of Americans have seen their savings vanish with the collapse of a fintech company called Synapse. The article gives the example of a schoolteacher who deposited the proceeds of her home sale – so basically her life savings – into an influencer promoted bank called Yotta. She first found herself locked out of that account – this went on for over six months – and last week she learned that she would only be getting $500 dollars of her $280 thousand dollars back from Yotta – that is point one eight percent of her savings that they are returning to her. She is of course not the only victim – according to a court-appointed trustee up to $96 million dollars of customer funds have vanished entirely.

[00:01:05] At Yotta which was a fintech – not a bank – despite being promoted as a bank by a number of big YouTubers – almost 14 thousand customers report that they are being offered a combined $11.8 million dollars despite having deposited almost 65 million dollars. It is not clear how this money is being divided up, as some customers like the schoolteacher I mentioned earlier are doing much worse than others. Yotta is a particularly strange example of a fintech – where it was originally launched as offering “prize linked savings accounts” which are savings accounts in which the depositor receives a low interest rate but then has the chance of winning a large amount of money in a sweepstakes. The New York Times described Yotta a year ago as "a smart way to turn gambling into a virtue". Andressen Horowitz – a large Silicon Valley VC firm – explained in their blog that fintechs like Yotta differentiate themselves

[00:02:09] by appealing to the aspirations and product demands of Gen Z – which I guess is gambling and saving in a non FDIC insured bank account. – this is why Gen Z are so hard to understand… Yotta originally offered depositors an interest rate of 0.2% with the chance of winning up to $10 million dollars, a prize they later revised down to $1 million dollars. It doesn’t appear that the top prize was ever won, and Coffeezilla reported on his YouTube channel a few months ago that Yotta pivoted from this sort of gamified savings model into a what was basically an online casino (which they describe (for legal reasons) as an online sweepstakes model.) Yotta itself has not declared bankruptcy, but due to the bankruptcy of Synapse, a fintech company it relied on, its customers lost access to their funds. According to CNBC Yotta and other fintechs in this online savings space advertised that

[00:03:14] their deposits were FDIC-insured. CNBC say that a contract that customers received from Synapse after signing up for checking accounts stated that user money was insured by the FDIC for up to two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. The FDIC – in contrast - has been very clear that its insurance fund does not cover the failure of fintechs or other nonbanks, and they have said that should such a firm fail, there is nothing they can do. The Treasury department – actually saw this problem coming and issued a report two years ago to the White House Competition Council about the entry of non-banks into the consumer banking space. The report argued that, while neobanks succeeded in increasing competition for deposits, with potential consumer benefits, there was one problem: “These firms are generally not subject to the same oversight for safety and soundness or for consumer protection.”

[00:04:18] The report said that “the fintechs avoided becoming banks – which is expensive and brings on regulatory burdens, instead choosing to partner with banks - so they both compete with and work with banks creating regulatory gaps. Those very regulatory gaps are the reason that all of this money can’t seem to be traced and one of the VC’s who funded Synapse – the fintech that collapsed – has been in the press this week saying that certain financial regulators need to be shut down – as they are slowing down his innovative business practices. Before we go any further let me tell you about this week’s video sponsor – My Heritage dot com. My heritage dot com is a genealogy and family research website with a massive international records database. I loved digging through the documents and census records from over 100 years ago and seeing my ancestors handwriting on records that list who lived in the family home at the time. The best part about

[00:05:23] My Heritage – is not just building out a family tree – it’s that it brings your family together, as you start calling up your aunts, uncles and grandparents asking them questions, filling in details of where your ancestors lived and worked and so on. I learned that my granduncle Charlie flew a Bristol Fighter in the first world war. The my heritage site is well laid out and easy to use – you can add old family photographs to the records– even animating them if you want to – and if you are lucky, you will find photos that other relatives have uploaded. MyHeritage is trusted by 90 million users worldwide and allows you to search through more than 20 billion historical documents to find records of all your ancestors. With the instant discoveries feature you can just click on the button and instantly generate entire lines of your family tree. I’m only getting going using MyHeritage and am looking forward to finding out more with time. MyHeritage are offering a 14-day free trial when

[00:06:25] you use my link in the video description or scan the QR code that's on your screen right now. In a recent episode of the Joe Rogan experience, Marc Andreessen, the co-founder of the VC firm Andreessen Horowitz, took shots at The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau – I’ll let the (always well-spoken Marc Andreessen explain the issue himself. [Clip – mostly mumbling]

[00:08:05] Now, we might need to fact check some of what Marc just said. While the CFPB was originally proposed by Elizabeth Warren in 2007, she was removed from consideration as its director by the Obama Administration, and has never headed it up. It’s current director is Rohit Chopra – and I don’t know if Marc struggles with face blindness or something like that – but it’s not easy to mix him up with Elizabeth Warren. Rohit is a 42 year old man of Indian descent and Elizabeth is a 75 year old woman of eh… well it doesn’t matter – it’s hard to mix them up is what I’m trying to say. Now – the audio seems to be a bit off in this section [Mumbling] but I think what Marc is saying (I may be wrong) is that the CFPB supervises banks, thrifts,

[00:09:07] and credit unions with assets of over $10 billion dollars, also supervising nondepository mortgage originators and servicers, payday lenders, consumer debt collectors, international money transfer and private student lenders. It’s in place to protect consumers from being ripped off by financial services providers – but it doesn’t yet cover fintechs like Yotta and Synapse… Marc accuses the CFPB of being involved in debanking – and in particular debanking conservatives. This is entirely untrue – in fact they do the opposite – they investigate banks for discriminatory treatment of customers. He goes on to effectively change the subject entirely to discussing Politically Exposed Persons – and while that is outside the scope of this video – I do happen to know a bit about that as I ran a fund for years. I’m amazed that Marc runs a multibillion-dollar

[00:10:10] fund and doesn’t understand these rules. Politically Exposed Persons are people like politicians, their families and their close business associates. If a politically exposed person – lets say someone like Hunter Biden - wants to move a large sum of money into a bank or an investment fund, the financial institution accepting those funds is required to investigate the source of those funds which usually involves asking the customer where the money came from – if they say it came from selling their house or liquidating another investment – you then have to ask them for documents proving this. This can be a bit awkward and embarrassing – as your customer often feels accused of wrongdoing – but most people in this position are used to these procedures which are in place to prevent politicians from taking bribes – or having bribes passed to their family members or business associates for them. If Elizabeth Warren wanted to

[00:11:12] invest a million dollars in an index fund – she would likely receive this sort of scrutiny. She would have to explain the source of the funds. Now in todays day and age – if a politically exposed person wanted to put money in your fund and said that the money came from crypto gains – there is a good chance you would be unable to take that money – as crypto is widely used in money laundering. A lot of crypto people get upset when you say this – but financial institutions can get in a lot of trouble if they touch dirty money – so crypto gains, or gambling wins will lead to more scrutiny until a financial institution can be sure that the money was earned honestly. When Chase closed Kanye West’s Bank account a few years ago (who I believe prefers to be called Ye) this is no different to a restaurant – or any other private business refusing to serve a customer – it is constitutionally protected. Now, I’m going to take Marc at his word – that he

[00:12:12] wants to have the CFPB shut down because of this debanking issue – that he possibly misunderstands. But Marc unfortunately missed this press release on the CFPB website – that came out about a week before his Joe Rogan interview about how they are going to crack down on illegal debanking (which I’m sure he would have been delighted about) – oh and there is another bit in there about how they plan to supervise the largest fintech companies. Now, maybe Marc’s firm doesn’t invest in fintech firms and he didn’t hear about this new development – a week before he was on Joe Rogan’s podcast… Let’s check his website… Oh, look at that, Synapse – that’s a fintech isn’t it… and there’s loads of fintechs and crypto stuff on the list- you know – the kind of stuff that American consumers might need to be protected from. They should probably remove Synapse from their list of investments though, it went bankrupt. How would Marc not know about these

[00:13:14] investments. It’s all over his website - does he not listen in the meetings? Here is a blog post on his company website from 2021 about Fintech cozying up to the creator economy. Oh look a video link. Come on Marc – the YouTubers know how to cover their tracks, and you are leaving everything up on your website. Ok, so let’s back up a bit – what exactly is a fintech anyhow? Well, the word is just a combination of the words “financial” and “technology” and it’s used to describe the use of technology to deliver financial services and products to consumers and it can apply to areas of banking, insurance, investing – or anything that relates to finance. Examples range from peer-to-peer payment services like Venmo and Zelle to robo advisors to stock- or crypto-trading apps like Robinhood to app-based insurance companies like Lemonade. Most of them advertise online – pick a narrow

[00:14:16] area of finance like taking deposits, or making short term loans and try and do it cheaper than a bank would often by automating customer service and by not needing any physical branch locations. Synapse was a fintech company that connected other fintech companies like Yotta to banks. When you deposited money at Yotta, it was passed to synapse who deposited it in a bank which held the money and was FDIC-insured. What Synapse did was keep track of whose money was where. Yotta just needed to design a gamified front end that people liked using and organize the sweepstakes, Synapse kept the records, and a bank held the money. Some of the fintechs – like Yotta promised “enhanced FDIC insurance of up to $500,000 dollars on their websites- explaining that the funds would be deposited “across a network of FDIC insured banks.

[00:15:18] Synapse described themselves as a “banking as a service provider” where they provided the back-end software for around 100 different fintech companies – who had millions of customers and they deposited the money at four different partner banks. The fintechs and the banks all relied on Synapse to track transactions and account balances and determine how much money was in each customer account at all times. Rather than licensing their software, Synapse struck deals with both the banks and the fintech apps. They handled customer onboarding, KYC and anti-money laundering checks, record keeping, risk-management and other compliance functions. Synapse created “for benefit of” accounts at the four partner banks they dealt with - where fintech customers’ money was deposited into interest bearing pooled accounts. Synapse being a tech firm and not a bank was mostly free of regulatory oversight.

[00:16:21] In April, Synapse filed for (what can only be described as a chaotic bankruptcy) where the banks quickly lost access to all customer and transaction data that was being maintained by Synapse and found themselves unable to work out whose money was who’s. The accounts were all frozen until that could be worked out. The problem seems to be that there is no good record - or at least no good - easily accessible record of who’s money is whose and the various companies involved are all accusing each other of wrongdoing. As Marc Andressen would say [Extensive mumbling] According to the most recent bankruptcy trustees report dated November 13th the four partner banks had $219 million dollars in deposits from Synapse, and 187 million dollars of that money has been disbursed to customers so far... So why isn’t the FDIC insurance kicking in? Well, none of these apps are banks, and for this reason

[00:17:27] they are not covered by FDIC insurance. The partner banks are FDIC insured – but the banks didn’t fail – the fintechs did – and the way they failed is not by investing the money and losing it – but by losing track of who the money belongs to – and that seems to be where we are today… Regulators have mostly been sidelined in this situation and this is because of the regulatory gaps that the treasury warned about in its report to the White House competition council two years ago. Banks are required to show that they are keeping good records – as obviously this is an important part of what banks do – but the banks records just show that the accounts belong to fintechs – and the synapse failure seems to mean that all detail beyond that is lost. The fintechs in question all worked with banks who keep deposits of less than ten billion dollars – and if you remember – that means that they are not overseen

[00:18:28] by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The FDIC has no role in the situation either as no banks have failed nor are they failing. At a hearing in June a letter from the Federal reserve was read out to the court stating that the Fed does not supervise or regulate fintech companies nor does it mediate or have the authority to mediate disputes among commercial entities.” It is expensive and time-consuming to deal with regulators - and fintech companies are all about moving quickly and keeping costs low. One of the ways of doing this is to structure your business model such that it works around existing regulation – which is what happened here – and customers love this until it all goes wrong… The Bankruptcy trustee - Jelena McWilliams – who was previously the chair of the FDIC writes in her report that “the estate [of Synapse] does not have the funds to implement an independent

[00:19:33] reconciliation nor any remaining operations or employees to participate in these efforts.” So, in plain English - Synapse, who built the technology to know whose money is who’s, has run out of money and no longer has any employees who can figure it out. Well, where have they all gone? Well, Sankaet Pathak, the founder and CEO of Synapse, announced in August that he had raised $11 million in VC funding for a new robotics startup called Foundation. In his twitter video he said that he had been working on the startup for three months – so basically since the bankruptcy announcement - and his goal is to Automate GDP through AI and Robotics to free people from labor jobs, allowing them to pursue their passions. He explains that declining birth rates will lead to severe labor shortages in 20-30 years,

[00:20:34] risking civilizational collapse, making this mission urgent. So yeah – I get that some people are worried about having lost their life savings – but Sankat is battling civilizational collapse – through AI robots… a noble cause indeed… His near-term goal – he says - is to have a walking humanoid robot by year end – that will be quite a breakthrough – If he needs one quickly I’d by that Honda one that was running around and kicking a football ten years ago. If there is one lesson that Sankaet should have learned from Synapse – its that you don’t always have to reinvent the wheel. It is not at all clear how this situation will resolve, the bankruptcy trustee has told the court that there is as much as a $95 million dollar “shortfall” and the judge has said that he suspects that tens of millions of dollars will never be found. - He goes on to say - “This is a very, very unusual situation.”

[00:21:41] Rob Copeland – who I interviewed on this channel a few months ago – wrote an article in the New York Times saying that it’s not always easy to know if your online bank is actually a bank. He says that start-ups frequently describe themselves using permutations of the word “bank,” even if they aren’t one. He points out that on its website, Chime describes itself as “banking with no monthly fees.” – and the fine print then reads, “Chime is a financial technology company, not a bank.” The lender Albert – he says - uses the slogan “the simple way to bank,” and then adds in the fine print, “Albert is not a bank.” Rob advises that you read the fine print, and if you are still unsure, he recommends emailing customer service – as a written record is always valuable. He says that you should ask where your money is being held and what other companies are involved. He says that any company that can’t provide a straightforward answer may

[00:22:43] actually be giving you the answer you need. Now look, I’d love to stick around and tell you more about this situation – but over the last few minutes I’ve grown increasingly concerned about civilizational collapse – and need to get to work (right away) on building an AI powered robot – I suggest you do the same. If you found this video interesting you should watch this one on how Pump and Dump schemes are now possibly legal next. Don’t forget to check out our sponsor my heritage dot com using the link in the video description so that you can research your family history. Have a great week and see you in the next video. Bye.
