[00:00:01] All right, everybody. Here we are. >> Welcome to the inaugural forward guidance post FMC live stream. Had to come out swinging. Had to get the big dogs in here. Super excited to have Brent Donnelly, Spectrum Markets, Bob Elliot of Unlimited Funds, and Joseph Wang of Fedgu.com. Guys, really great to have you on here. What's going on? >> Hey, Felix. Uh, excited to be on the first one. I brought out the uh very best shirt for this. Um I think maybe I'll just start right away. Uh I think what we saw was relatively hawkish compared to very doubbish expectations going in. So the two descents were expected and I think what the market really wanted was some kind of assurance that September's in play and that didn't seem to happen. And that comes on the backdrop of a pretty big bond short covering rally yesterday as people were kind of anticipating a doubbish FOMC and maybe something from the QR and they got

[00:01:03] neither. So to me it reads hawkish but I'd like to hear what the other guys think. >> Go for certain market action aligns with what you're saying. Um, and you know, I think there's this there has been this like building, you know, not just like run it hot in the sense of macroeconomically run it hot, but run it hot like um just blow out easy financial conditions. Um, and that's just like not happening. Like and I think it's interesting, you know, we we've lived in a place for the last six months or so where there has been a lot of uh volatility in the policym environment and I think um a real question about essentially how far can the the new administration push their desire to create easy monetary policy and easy fiscal policy meaning like whatever low borrowing easy fiscal

[00:02:04] policy policy, how far can they push that? And I think probably what we're seeing right now is running into the institutional constraints that exist um almost by design to ensure that a single elected official doesn't have the ability to control the entirety of the macroeconomic policy agenda. And so whether it's the technocrats that were sitting in the Treasury or the technocrats sitting at the Fed, they basically all rebelled against the idea of the fact that, you know, of the ideas that we were going to issue no long-term debt and we were going to cut interest rates to 100 basis points. Like basically everyone rejected that idea because it's not only total nonsense in the sense of like it is bad imprudent macroeconomic policy um but it's also just totally inconsistent with the typical uh the the sort of priorities of those institutions and how they should you know and how they are mandated to operate. >> Yeah Bob that's a really interesting point. feels like we we saw the checks

[00:03:06] and balances at work the last couple days and that's an interesting crossurren between what was going on in the QR today that we saw which is that it felt like there was the off chance that they're just going to issue no coupons and just go full bills mode and then the same thing in the Fed and obviously we see that we live to fight another day the uh the American democracy prevails. Joseph want to move over to you and just get your high level read on what was your takeaway on the Fed today. >> Yeah, I agree with Brent. It was it was hawkish. He was surprisingly hawkish in my view and you can see that in the rates market, right? Rates all selling off, people pricing out rate cuts. So honestly, I felt like he was kind of getting his revenge a little bit. So as we all know, he kind of the president visited him, gave him a pat on the back, told him like you better cut rates. And I I guess he didn't appreciate that. So on the top level, I think it's worth noting that we had two governor descents today. And that's really really unusual. So usually what happens is as the chair goes around and tries to lobby everyone to have a united front. This is the same for all central banks, right? If you

[00:04:06] listen to the ECB, everyone always asks about how unanimous was the decision and so forth. So having two governor descents was unusual and they had good reason to descent too. Governor Waller made it made his uh made his argument through a long speech and I think there are a lot of economists who would agree with that perspective. So it's it's not someone who's just politicking for a job. But so chair Powell gave us his version of it and from his perspective he's just saying that you know uh we're just not that restrictive. Economy is great. Labor market is great. Inflation's a little bit above target. So you know we're going to keep things as they are. What really struck me was that so one of the core arguments that we should be cutting rates now is to say that this inflation bout that we could have through tariffs again we don't know how much to what extent but you know theoretically we could have a bout of inflation from tariffs standard economic theory is that we would look through this as a one-time change in the price level and that's what I think standard economists would say and ask about this chair pow was like yeah I am looking

[00:05:06] through this that's why I'm not hiking so so so that was that really stood out to me. So, uh, it >> was the best line in the whole presser was >> so good >> was was that I'm I'm I'm looking through the turf. You know, you're lucky. You should all right now >> and I think it speaks to the fact that Waller has kind of gone rogue. And >> I mean, I guess I disagree a little bit. I feel like it is a bit political. Um, he's talking about an insurance cut, but you've had inflation over target for 52 straight months. They have no idea where neutral is. Inflation's about to go up. Whether that's temporary or not, we don't know. Unemployment's at cycle lows. Wage pressure is probably about to go up because of immigration crackdown. The wealth effect is in play. Financial conditions are loose. Deficit trains accelerating. So to me, I think Waller is kind of going rogue for political reasons. And I think one thing that I liked about Powell today was he showed a lot of humility on our Star. So

[00:06:08] >> over the years they've, you know, shown some confidence of like, okay, we estimated to be here. We're pretty confident. You can tell by his body language and his tone of voice today. Like they have no concl where where our star is. So I think it's good that he's showing humility and they're they're going to wait and see. Uh honestly, Waller's speech talks about a an insurance cut. I think you could make the argument for an insurance hike if you were of a different um you know political bias or a different economic bias. So, I don't know. I think Pow Powell did a great job today and and that that comment like you said, Joe, about him saying, "Hey, dude, if if we thought it was inflationary, we'd be raising rates." That's kind of a shocker because there was also another moment where the one of the press uh tried to push him into committing to September. And he was obviously ready for that. And he was like, "Dude, I'm not committing. Uh we've got Jackson Hole. You got two series of economic data. you got like two CPIs, two PCES, two NFPS. So, uh, to

[00:07:11] me it all makes sense. But anyways, yeah, I I think Powell is really reflecting the committee and Waller is not. >> Um, guys, I just want to circle back on something that was interesting to me in the statement and I'll just pull it up here. And I noticed that uh Bob and Joseph, you both posted charts this morning of the PDFP numbers that we got from GDP. And it was very notable to see how many times the PDF was brought up during this press conference. And it's with good reason, right? Like the last two GDP prints have just been so noisy, so much whipsaws because of this net exports. And you know, in the first quarter it was huge amounts of imports which led to a a negative GDP print and then today we saw a pretty significant upside surprise in the GDP print because of the reversal of that. So we've all had to hone in on PDFP as a a truer, more concise look at where growth is at. And what I found interesting and I'm curious to get both of you to validate this or not, but we saw this change in the statement where they basically removed the have affected and said that

[00:08:12] it continues to affect the growth outlook. And furthermore, they noticed and changed it from has continued to expand at a solid pace to moderate in the first half of the year. So my read of that was that Powell was squarely focused on this print in the PDFP number and seeing this continued downward tick. So yeah, curious on both of you guys' read on whether you saw that as the same validation or not. >> So I I think this so like you mentioned a lot of people over the past few years have been emphasizing this final sales to private domestic purchasers as B quote unquote core GDP and a better measure of underlying economic activity. And so in the past when we would have weak readings on headline people would be like hey actually uh final sales to private domestic purchasers is strong. So no need to worry. Today we have the inverse headline looks looks pretty strong but this is is weakening. So this kind of adds to to the argument that you know the economy is weakening. You know maybe you should policy shouldn't be

[00:09:14] where it is. So I think what chair pow how chair pow would address that is that so their mandate is not growth it's full employment and price stability and he'd point to these huge demographic shifts whereas the population is not growing as much as it used to right President Trump is cracking down on illegal immigration and so maybe this is just a reflection of just this uh few less population growth ra rather than anything else so I I think that's one potential for that Again, you can also easily make the argument that uh actually maybe this is something more and you could challenge the assertion that the labor market is actually strong to have lots of evidence that you know there are some cracks there. So, this is something we're just going to keep debating until we get more data in the coming months. From my perspective, um, uh, I mean, first of all, it makes sense that if the Fed's trying to figure out what's going on with growth, the like whipssaw and

[00:10:16] annoying measure measuring and mismeasuring of GDP is not that relevant. This is the this is the relevant picture. And if you either looked at GDP accounting or you did a combination of a variety of hard data measures, it would basically paint the same picture that you're seeing on this chart, which is a meaningful slowing. I I think from my perspective, probably the more important thing that I see with this chart is uh and and how it appears as though the overall economy is slowing at a time when we have restricted labor supply and a slowdown in hiring comes back to what is actually driving this economy. It's not a credit driven cycle. It's not a deficit driven cycle. Deficits have not changed. They've gone up if anything over this period. It is an income driven cycle and when you constrict the ability to earn income by slowing labor supply, you get slowing demand which is exactly what we're

[00:11:16] seeing. I think this is this is one of the key this one of the first stress tests of that idea and I think it's very important because what ends up happening is if this is an income driven expansion what happens is while the Fed is focused on the tightness of the labor markets businesses get focused on the strength of the economy and so when you see the strength of the economy slowing like this strength of demand slowing like this that almost always has businesses start to take second order effects where you know if you see a slowdown in demand then you start to reduce your labor force or cut back on your spending and that's what creates a typical you know negative reinforcing cycle at the sort of the later stages of a late cycle environment and so I think this is this is highlighting um that we might we're right on the tipping point of that like if this gets any weaker then you're going to start to see businesses start to scale back um and it continues to be proof that it's it's a important validation that is a income driven cycle

[00:12:18] that's driving that's that's driving this uh economic activity today. >> Yeah, Brand, I want to bounce it over to you and get your read on the economy and the growth outlook because correct me if I'm wrong, but are you of the mind of of this being a, you know, pretty notable weakness or I I believe that you're in more the camp of inflation uptaking from here on out? What's your read? >> Yeah, I'm I'm more agnostic. I just feel like soft landing is the base case and that continues. Um, like Bob said, I think one of the most interesting dynamics is that you could potentially get a drop in labor market demand and a drop in supply at the same time. So, I think it's interesting from a trading point of view because I'm usually more like in the trading business and less in the macro, you know, bigger picture stuff. I think it's interesting that Powell specifically said to watch the unemployment rate and he kind of discounted NFP headline because I think that's hawkish because I think that that means you can get a a slowing demand for labor. So like lower headline NFP, but

[00:13:19] then you can still get unemployment rate around 4041 as the immigration crackdown um restricts the supply of workers. So I think that's interesting. I think and just touching on Bob's point, I think a lot of things can be true at the same time. I think you can have sticky inflation, falling labor demand, falling labor supply, and like sort of sluggish but not that great but not horrible growth all at the same time. I mean, there's so many weird things going on in the economy. Like if you look at historically a housing cycle doing this would be catastrophic for the jobs market normally and it hasn't been. So, I feel like there's been this weird kind of baton passing thing where it was healthcare, it was government, for a while it was housing obviously. Um, and then for a while it was like a shortage of workers and then there was a kind of a mild excess of workers. But everything has been kind of ebbing and flowing in but against the backdrop of a pretty anti-fragile economy that like debt

[00:14:20] isn't that bad. you know there was still a lot of money slashing around although it's arguable whether that's the case now so to me I think you just have to stick with like soft landing based case and then the Fed like I said before doesn't really know where where our star is so Fed on hold for the rest of the year and you know but growth kind of being like medium slow and but then still you are at 41 and core PCE and P and CPI still around 3% by the end of the year so that's kind of how I see it and I don't know what you would call that like it's not really stagflation it's not definitely not a boom it's not really goldilocks it's like I guess it's stagflation light with the side order of goldilocks >> I like I like that approach I mean it's the first thing I think about is when he was starting Paul was starting to talk a bit about the inflation outlook and how it's changed so much where you know in the past year or so there's been this large focus on services inflation and housing and owners equivalent and rent

[00:15:21] and all of that keeping inflation upticking and and elevated. And now what we've seen is the opposite situation where that's actually providing the biggest disinflationary force right now to inflation. Whereas on the other side of things, core goods, which was outright, you know, month over month deflationary for a couple months there earlier, we're now starting to see some upticks there. So wi with that in mind would love to just hear starting with Joseph just your read on that especially on that core goods situation because obviously what we're all trying to figure out is how much of this uptick in core goods right now is related to tariffs. Uh how much of it is related to other things in the economy as it stands? >> Yeah I I don't know. So the data seems really messy to me. On one hand you have all these people trying to frontr run tariffs. So that's going to impact just how how you look at the data. And also, let's say tariffs do have an impact. You could have the exporter reduce their price and so it wouldn't necessarily show up in those in prices that we receive. Japanese auto

[00:16:22] exporters, for example, there's that chart going around. Uh the auto export prices out of Japan declined 20% year-over-year. That's because the auto companies over there, they ate the tariff. So I think it's a very very hard picture to to untangle and we really aren't going to you know find out more about it until until maybe months months ahead. I think what we know is that um at you know roughly the tariff rates that are being pursued and of course there's always noise around that but let's call it high teens effective tariff rates you're looking at you know somewhere in the four to500 billion a year rough increase in taxes. Uh and that um somebody's got to pay it. That's you know it's it's not it's not magic. Someone's got to pay it. It's got to be the foreigner, you know, the businesses on shore or the consumer. And um and if you're, you know, if you sort of socialize that expense, particularly

[00:17:23] onshore, uh you know, you're looking at something like a 100 basis point rise in um in overall inflation seen by the consumer if they take 50% of the price rise, which I think is, you know, these things these sorts of things are highly uncertain. Um, and nonetheless, I think you can get a sense as to like, you know, it's not zero, it's not 5%, it's like 100 basis points. And, you know, it's 100 basis points when inflation's already a little too high. And you put that, you know, from the Fed's perspective. And you put that together and and that's not a great situation for the Fed. And then you also add essentially 100 basis point rise in prices at a time when like incomes are slowing down and labor market growth is not great. And so it's on the margin like bad for growth, right? You sort of put those things together. And so we kind of know uh you know in the old in the old words of chairman Powell, the direction uh of travel on growth and inflation from these tariffs is clear.

[00:18:25] The magnitudes, the timing, the pacing, all of that is uncertain. Um, but you know, it's probably moving in that direction. >> Anything you want to add there, Brent? >> No, I mean, I think what the only thing I would add is that it's kind of hilarious how the market just priced the tariffs in, then priced them out, and now no one really is is talking about them anymore in terms of their impact on growth. But if you look at the earnings that have come out so far, like basically just filter with any kind of common sense filter, like people that sell stuff that's heavy or that gets shipped around, those companies have been doing bad and companies that you know do virtual money printing by AI or whatever, those companies are doing well. So like it is having an impact in the real world. But I think the issue is that or for for the stock market and and really like for trading. The issue is that those parts of the economy like manufacturing and all that are just microscopic in terms of um operating

[00:19:26] margins and overall operating income compared to the mag 7. So you can get all kinds of crazy stuff happening in manufacturing and in the real economy and nobody gives a because AI capex is the only thing that really matters. like it's so large relative to the real economy that I think that's one thing that's difficult is that we're so used to looking at like the real economy and it's really not the real economy that's driving a lot of things right now. Um so I think that's making it challenging and that's creating a lot of red herrings that are are hard on the trading side because it's hard to ignore all this stuff like the baseline tariff being at 18%. Kind of seems like that would be meaningful. Um, but then you know like we were talking about Smoot Holly comparisons and stuff but in 1930 I mean you guys would know better than me but I would guess in 1930 it was probably 9010 manufacturing services and now it's 9010 services manufacturer whatever. Uh that's an exaggeration but it's something like that. So, it's very very difficult to to even have an idea of

[00:20:29] what all this real economy stuff means when AI capex is just so freaking huge and the profits of these companies are so big. Like Microsoft makes more money than the top 100 companies in Canada, including the six chartered banks. So, I I think that's creating a big challenge on the trading side is actually figuring out what matters and what doesn't because a lot of these wobbles in the economy just have meant nothing. So, uh, I guess that's part of why my bias is to dismiss the sort of underlying weakness theories because they haven't mattered because and and for good reason because AI capex and operating margins of mag 7 are so high. So, but obviously it's dangerous to be that dismissive forever because at some point the real economy should matter. Uh, but maybe maybe that will come when credit spreads widen. I don't know. Yeah, I think that's entirely plausible. Um, all right. So, I just want to broaden the conversation a bit to currencies as you know it's it's my view

[00:21:30] that so much of the dynamics that we're talking about especially with it relates to tariffs and and how that affects global capital flows is increasingly relevant. Um, Brento, you're you know your newsletter this morning. You mentioned that you're along the US dollar. That's obviously played off pretty nicely in this meeting thus far. What's what's difficult about this this bounce in the Dixie is trying to isolate it between, you know, what is what is speculative or tactical versus like positioning versus these more fundamental changes in currencies. So, obviously, you know, Bob, you're on the show a couple months ago. We discussed a lot this dynamic of of balance of payments and how that can be reflected in currencies over the next 6 to 12 months or so. And of course, it's it it's always so tough to talk about the dollar because I mean, even in the press conference, um Jerome Pal was asked about the dollar and he just said, "We don't talk about it. We don't think about it. That's for the Treasury. We're ignoring it." But it's such a big factor right now. Like the Dixiey's down, it's

[00:22:31] had one of its worst starts to the year ever. Um and it feels like it should go lower if we're going to continue down this route of of tariff implementation and how that affects trade deficits. So, we just love to get each of your guys' read on on where you see dollar heading on both a short-term basis, but also a longer time horizon as well. Um, Joseph, maybe you can kick us off. >> So, it looks like the dollar, like you mentioned, there's a lot of charts going going out where it was having the worst year since 1973, but of course, the past few weeks it's been bouncing. So, Brent's Brent's call is spot on. today is we're having this uh pretty pretty good update for the dollar uh because obviously Paul was was pretty hawkish but I think the dollar is going to weaken pretty substantially going forward. I think there are two things in my view that are driving this. First off is that we have very loose fiscal policy right that's obviously negative for currency. Our fiscal deficit is very large compared to other countries. So

[00:23:32] you keep doing this and you're projected to continue to do this indefinitely. that's you're basically printing dollars and that's negative for the currency and when it comes to monetary policy. So we have chair pow today kind of standing up for for the Fed but that's it's only a matter of time before Trump gets his own Fed guy into the Fed and we all know that he wants lower interest rates and he also has enormous sway in the Senate in Congress. So eventually we're going to get someone who likes easy money in the Fed and that could just be someone who values employment over inflation. So the secular trend I think is going to be a weaker dollar. Now I think the tariffs and all this other stuff that we're doing geopolitically probably play into I think perceptions of the reliability of the US as well. And so I think that on the margins would have some weakening demand. Was was that just like a subtle uh play to uh throw throw your nomination in there, Joseph?

[00:24:34] >> Well, you know, the president hasn't called me yet, but you know, so it's over. >> But if asked, I would certainly consider it. >> Bob, where are you at on this? Um I I think there's sort of a uh this week was important because it basically was a week in which we assessed the question of whether uh we were going to you know blow it out with easy policy um and run it hot or uh or we were going to do something essentially on the prudent side of things. Um and from my perspective it's mostly answered that um by and large you know it's going to be pretty prudent. Um and I think that's an important um that's an important uh line in the sand in terms of what's likely to happen let's say in the in the medium term I through the end of the year um in terms of uh you know the currency and the

[00:25:34] debasement and all those things. So, so my guess is we're going to see, my guess is actually it's not going to be that interesting is the short story. Um, more strategically, we, you know, foreigners continue to have be wildly overinvested in US assets. And the set of policies that we're talking about here are policies that are growth negative for the US on top of federal government policies that are growth negative for the US. Um and so when you think about it from that perspective given that growth sensitivity has been such an important driver of capital flows crossber capital flows this is it's interesting like in a shortterm sense it's it feels very dollar bullish but in sort of a longer term sense meaning like over the course of a couple years if the US is going to slow down meaningfully while the rest of the world is stimulating both fiscally and monetarily that will that will bring the question back to why are we overweight all these assets maybe it's because you know AI

[00:26:36] data centers are going to like literally eat the whole United States like Arizona is going to become entirely chipm and AI data centers there's a question about who the hell's going to pay for all that um and how they're going to earn any revenue doing it but you know I that's a bit of a joke I think the the bigger story here is that if the US is slowing down and the rest of the world is not in such a weak position and these policies are incentivizing that that will create the sort of longerterm capital flows away from overweight US. Um just probably not in the you know we're not going to see it in the course of weeks. It's in the course of years like we talked about before. >> Yeah. And I mean I don't strongly disagree even though I'm long dollars right now. I I think there's kind of two two frameworks that are operating um in opposition right now. So you have the structural story which is what Joe and Bob are talking about which is capital flight policy weirdness and all that kind of stuff. But the problem right now or the problem has been really since

[00:27:37] about the start of July is the 10% selloff in the dollar was like people thought section 899 was going to be in vogue. People thought there was a Mara Lago accord to weaken the dollar. People thought their Fed was going to cut multiple times this year. You know people were talking about US recession possibly. And when you're looking at the dollar, there's always the structural side and then there's the cyclical side. And really like the good exciting dollar sell-offs uh tend to have both. So like the big selloff from 2002 to 2008. A lot of that was you know the Fed had cut into recession in 0203. The dollar was overvalued and there's a lot of similarities now. But the problem is that like none of the dreams are coming true for the dollar bears. Like the capital flight story really was just like an April thing. Like if you look at the tick data, pe money was coming back into the US starting in May and you know the AI capex was another the deepseek freakout and all that. That was another reason people were selling dollars because the US had lost AI supremacy and

[00:28:40] Nvidia was below 100 bucks and now it's at 180 or whatever. So I think the issue with the dollar down trade is that it's a structural story and that just makes it very difficult to trade. So I think as an investor like staying underweight dollars is probably fine but these cyclical little rebounds could go on. You know this this dollar rally could go another 5%. We could retrace half of the 10% drop. And so I'm more in that camp right now simply because you're just not getting you you priced in a lot of bad stuff for the dollar. And honestly, if you went down the list, like I think there was a list, somebody wrote a pretty good piece that had the eight sort of super bad things for the dollar. I don't think they worded it that way, but and I would say like six or seven of those have not happened. So like I went through most of them just now. So what I think you really need like Bob said is you need some evidence of a cyclical slowdown and then the dollar will get smoked because it is quite overvalued

[00:29:42] like if you look at the dollar index it's basically just in a massive trend since Bretton Woods since 1970 or whatever because there's a lot of um kind of built-in rebalancing effects like when the dollar gets super weak it's inflationary and people come to the US and people buy US goods and vice versa. So there is like some kind of feedback loop that dampens the volatility in the super big picture. So given that we're somewhat overvalued now it's I think the structural view makes sense but cycl cyclally I don't know to me there's just not enough evidence that things are are bad in the US and there's not enough evidence that the Fed's going to cut. So right now I'm long dollars um and especially because positioning got very offside there for a while although I don't think it's that offside anymore. And just sorry one other thing is if you look at like the 20 currencies that people trade the US has the highest yields other than Brazil and Mexico. So it's very expensive to sit there short

[00:30:44] dollars. It's a short carry trade and generally people in FX hate being short carry. >> Yeah 100%. Um, all right. So, I just want to sharpen this question a little bit here and take everything you all three have articulated in terms of your macro framework and view and contrast it with where we're at in terms of pricing for Fed cuts over the next 12 months or so. Um, really interesting to see that September odds going into the meeting were about 50/50 if I'm correct there and it looks like those are now under 50/50. the less of a chance of a cut in September is the large shakeway that that could have changed since the last time I looked, but that's the last thing I saw. Um, we also had this situation in 2026 of trying to speculate on what's going to happen once PAL was gone. Um, we've seen a some big moves in sofer curves back there in terms of some meaningful doubbishness as this starts as the market tries to digest whether Trump will get his 300 bips of cuts or not. So would love to just hear from

[00:31:44] each of you of of what's your read as we come out of the FOMC meeting as we also come out of the QR too which we hinted at a little bit but obviously that was a a pretty a pretty significant insignificant event in terms of the fact that just it felt like a lot of bad things in terms of bad for the state of of the US and its fiscal position but none of them really happened. So yeah, I'll point it to either any of you guys to kick us off on your read there. All right, since I know the least about the Fed, I'll start. Um, and I'll keep mine my answer short. Uh, just with regard to the May 2026 thing, I don't really buy it as being like a definitionally doubbish event, I think it's very very conditional on where the economy is. If GDP is 3% and and CPI is 3.1 and core PCE is 3.0, know it doesn't really matter who comes in. If Worsh or, you know, Hassid or Drake or whatever comes in as a head of the Fed, I it's not going to matter because the economy

[00:32:45] is going to be telling them not to cut rates. So, I I think it's a little bit overblown. Like, it creates obviously a doubbish um at the a doubbish tilt at the margin when you put a more doubbish person in there. But, in the end, it's they're not just going to completely dissolve the framework and cut 300 basis points. Like, this isn't Turkey. there's still there's still institutional commitments that the people inside the Fed will have no matter who's running it. The rest of the voters will still have something to say. So, I I'm not as much of a buyer of that theory uh that that it will necessarily be all that doubbish in May 2026. >> I think from from my perspective uh sort of agree from with what Brent's saying, which is really comes down to the economy. Um, and I think it's interesting like right now when you look at how things are priced, they're priced for like cuts quickly and then no cuts in or or more limited cuts um once the new uh chairperson is put in place. And

[00:33:48] I think that's kind of interesting because you know what we've talked about here is and and the rhetoric at least that that Powell gave today was that like you know we're going to have a slowing you know even with a slowing GDP growth he's not so worried unless the unemployment rate starts to rise rapidly. And so like if I'm looking at that both a combination of the timing of the economic weakness and the on the margin dovishness of the POW Fed versus the new person Fed, the new Fed guy Fed. Um I look at those two things together and I say to myself like the mispricing looks like there's too many cuts in the short term and not enough cuts in the long term. Long term meaning and and where is that pivot point? you know, that focal point maybe is is March of next year or something like that. And so that's kind of how I would how I would like look at the the pressures on it right now relative to what's priced in. >> No, I agree. So obviously how the

[00:34:48] economy performs is the most important thing in getting rate cuts next year, but it's not the only thing. So I think actually by holding rates where they are you can kind of see that interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy have already been suffering. Housing most notably again we have declines in house prices. Now so far construction employment has held up fine but so a lot of people are baking into baking rate cuts into in into their forecast when thinking about the rest of the year. Let's say those don't come. Mortgage rates go back up. you can easily see this tightening really do does really do filter into um employment and that that would have a impact on the real economy on things that the Fed cares about. So and of course you have tariffs and all that stuff like that. So to me we are definitely the economy will be slowing induced by policy and so we should have a number of cuts next year but I think who the Fed chair is matters a lot as well. So we can see this today, right? You can have very reasonable

[00:35:50] arguments that tariffs are one time shock to the price level, transitory, a perception that we are currently restrictive and a perception that the labor market is weak, so we should cut today. So that there is right now very obvious example of how having a different Fed chair matters. Now you're right that the FOMC is a committee. There are many people there, but not everyone is equal on the committee. The Fed chair is by far the most influential person and can definitely drive discussions. And if Trump were to have his person had the FOMC, he'd also have other allies, too. It's not the only Trump appointee on on the committee. So, I think that does matter and does argue for a more dovish shift in policy next year. And I I think when thinking about the government, I think it's really important to to, you know, be a bit more open-minded as to how this could evolve. So we've seen a lot of changes in how the US government operates over the past few months, right? So something's different. The

[00:36:51] future may not look like the past and you really could have a world where the executive popularly elected has more say in monetary policy and that would not be the first time this happened. Um about the QR guys, the QR is kind of like the Fed meeting. Everything is done through forward guidance. And they said last year that they're not going to change coupon sizes. And so it it surprises me that there's that there could be excitement around this, right? It's going to be very boring for for the rest of this year. Next year though, first quarter, it could be exciting. That's when we could have some changes potentially or more interestingly no changes in coupon sizes. >> Yeah, 100%. to your point, Joseph, about um the committee being 12 members, not just the chair deciding what to do. Even though they do have a lot of power and can can definitely sway things one direction or another, it is an interesting situation to expand the potential outcome of the committee in 2026 where okay, you have Waller and

[00:37:52] Bowman who have both descented today and it's and and sort of signaling where their heads are at and their intentions are. Then you have Cougler who's going to be moving on next year. So that's going to open up another spot as well. And then if you have another situation where and Powell got asked about this and that's what actually ended the press conference pretty abruptly is being asked what's your plan? Would you stay on as governor and he just said I'm not talking about it and then he left the room. Um shows how important impression this conversation is right now about what does the composition of the committee look like in 2026. Do you get to a point where you start to see almost a majority of the committee being sort of softly under under Trump's purview in one way or another? How do how do all three of you think about that? >> Well, sorry. Go ahead, Joe. >> We all want to jump in on that one. >> Here, Bob, you go. You haven't talked about, you go first. Um uh I I think the um the POW thing is interesting and I think really probably

[00:38:53] what's happening there and I have no inside knowledge on this just my guess seeing how he's behaved uh in the last few months is that he's waiting to see who's appointed as chair. Um, and if a hack is appointed as chair, he's going to stick around and do whatever it takes to, you know, make sure that the whole place doesn't fall apart. Um, and if a if a if a, you know, a modestly more dovish than how Powell might think about things, which to be clear, Powell's like pretty dovish all things considered in this world. Um, certainly more dovish than if I was running monetary policy. So, take that for what it's worth. I won't be getting any calls anytime soon from the administration. Um, you know, if the person's just, you know, like a wall or whatever, you know, he'll probably say, "Good enough. This isn't going to be a disaster. Let's move on." And so I think that's um he's wait he's taking a wait and see approach uh on monetary policy and also on whether he

[00:39:54] sticks around. And Joe, I love your idea about just keeping an open mind because obviously so much crazy crazy stuff has been happening. And in the event of say the opposite of what Bob's describing where people just there's like a mass exodus and people are just like, "Okay, I got to get out of here. This is crazy train type situation." Then the the problem for Trump is going to be that the backend will get crushed. So they're going to be cutting rates and the backend rates are going to be going up. So, I feel like it's it's kind of like a it it's a ridiculous situation anyways because like not that it matters, but it's kind of a ridiculous situation because if the Fed were to just start cutting rates right now with inflation where it is, you know, the back backend yields are going to go up, not down, and that's going to squeeze the mortgage market even worse. So I feel like you know somebody like Wars or Waller or whoever knows that and then that will be a constraint. But if if it goes

[00:40:55] completely crazy train then then you get the bond vigilante trade and the backends will sell off and that'll be sell dollars sell bonds which is the trade that the market tried to do in April but um kind of failed. So I I think so like like you mentioned Felix that Krugler seat is going to be vacated earlier next year so they can appoint someone to fill that. Now usually what happens after a chair's term ends is that they leave the board of governors and that would normally give Trump the chance to appoint another governor. And I agree with Bob that you know Powell might be trying to stay maybe if he feels like he needs to defend the institution and so forth. But I really don't think that's going to fly at the end of the day. You're not elected. What are you defending? Who voted for you? Right. So if if he were to just stick stick around, I think they take out the big guns and find a way to get rid of him. Get the executive, Congress, these guys,

[00:41:56] they have the power. One civil servant defending what he thinks to be the right thing is admirable, but he doesn't get to decide what is the right thing. Now, if we did have political control over the Fed and rates were cut a lot, there could be a scenario where longer rates shoot up, right? Fling the dollar, capital fight, stuff like that. But I I would also note that if you did have a situation where the White House controlled the Fed, they could also just roll out things to, you know, yield curve control, Kiwi, stuff like that to control the long end as well. So, the the thing that would really take a hit would be the dollar. And as I understand, the president is it would be happy with the weaker dollar. That's kind of what their policy is. It's part of their plan to have a more competitive exporting sector. So, a lot of possibilities there. We just have to wait and see. >> Yeah, 100%. All right, guys. Just to round out this conversation here and finish up, let's uh let's get tactical.

[00:42:56] Let's get tangible. What's what's the trade? What's the asset allocation? What's the portfolio construction depending on your time horizon based off the data that we saw today based off the Fed meeting today? What's your guys' read? >> I mean, you you saw mine, Felix. It's pretty simple. I'm just long dollar yen looking for 151 152. I think you also get a kicker there that Ishiba could resign at some point. uh the LDP is meeting to decide his fate and I think there's a face saving element where he might want to just resign if he if he finds out that he's out he might want to resign before he gets um sacked. So and that would be mildly bullish dollar yen as well. So I think the market's still short dollar yen. I think above 150 you start to see the CTAs uh get forced to buy dollar yen as well. So I think dollar yen another like two 300 points higher and and that's like a oneweek view and that I know that's kind of short for most listeners but hey that's my that's my time horizon. So love it.

[00:43:57] >> I like that. I like that trade particularly because the BOJ like there's there's so many people who position thinking the BOJ was going to start tightening in response to this like fake inflationary thing that was related to price and stuff like that and like none of that like none of that none of that's happening >> data doesn't support it um and uh and all indications are you know the BOJ is going to be cautious which like if you have been around in markets for 25 years or whatever Like the BOJ is always cautious. >> Hiker trade for a reason. >> 60 basis points in two years. Like you've got to be kidding me. They've done nothing. I think Paul's done nothing. The BOJ has done more nothing for longer than anybody. Um my trade is u is relatively straightforward. Look, you've got bond yields still at basically cyclical highs and you've got stocks basically at cyclical highs and

[00:44:57] you have a slowing economy and what that and a slowing economy with negative growth policy ahead and no easing coming from the Fed or the Treasury in terms of their financing. that's teeing up what I think will be um what I'm calling the season of disappointment trade in the second half which is that bonds are going to outperform stocks and um and that you know which is very typical in a weight cycle environment and even today even today when you look at what's got priced in today growth expectations did not meaningfully come down today despite all the information the incremental information that we got some priced in yesterday but >> this in general like we are still at peaks in terms of market based pricing of expectations of future growth and that um you know bonds are coming back baby >> nice Joseph >> no I can agree with that I I look at the equity markets and it you know it seems like it's it's kind of ebulent right it

[00:45:59] seems like almost frenzy like you see in some of the pockets you have the meme stocks come back and you go on Twitter and you know all these people who just nothing bad ever happens and so forth But I I think the underlying economy is slowing. You have very obvious macro policies that are basically slowing it, right? You're you're raising taxes through tariffs. And today you have monetary policy that's asserting that we're we're going to be a bit more restrictive than you thought. So that's a recipe for a slower macroeconomy. And I think that eventually is going to lead to slower growth, potentially even recessionary impacts. And so I would stay away from the risk assets and know things that are safer. it's fixed income or gold, things like that. I think those would do better. >> I want to get Okay, we we'll finish off with this question because you mentioned gold and it's just Yeah, it's getting clobbered right now. And that just brings up this question of of what's felt like the hot narrative, which is nothing stops the train, run it hot, devaluation. It's led to Bitcoin do very well. It's

[00:47:00] led to gold do very well. Where do you guys see that narrative landing right now? Overdone. Yeah, I think that's way overdone. Uh I mean the crypto world is I mean supported by public policy, but that argument that oh it's just going to go to the moon so forth that that's that's kind of classically what you see when you're at in a frenzy. Nothing can go wrong so we just lover up by it until something does go wrong. Bob. >> Um I think there were there was there's irrational uh activity. Um for instance, it was only a few days ago that Fartcoin was making uh was at highs. Um and which is of course our favorite memecoin that we can uh keep an eye on. it has come off a little bit uh in recent days but you know that's that's just irrational speculation.

[00:48:01] There's sort of a more rational speculation which is was around the expected value if the US decided this week to basically run incredibly easy policy. And you know, I think part of part of the thing that existed there was like if the choice was for instance to issue no coupons or if chairman Bow was like, "Okay, we're going to cut because I got brow beat into it." Like the upside of those hard assets was just very high relative to the downside that would exist. So from an expected value basis, it was not actually like a bad trade to be positioned that way. But the picture ahead's pretty clear. We're not going to have that mega toacement trade going on. And so that expected value has got to unwind from those assets. It's why I actually like the bonds relative to stocks instead of, you know, tactically liking gold relative to stocks at this point. >> Nice. All right. Take us on, Brad. >> Yeah. So for me, I just make the distinction between crypto as a risky

[00:49:01] asset and gold as like some kind of medium like it's kind of a liquidity barometer, but it's also sometimes works as a safe haven. So to me, the crypto treasury stuff feels very much like the ICO craze and the spa craze and the NFT craze. It's basically insiders trying to find exit liquidity and bag holders as much as as quickly as possible. Like Adam back selling or or doing a crypto treasury to me is like one of those things where and also if you look at the price action now, those stocks don't go up anymore. Like the joke is up. people understand that, you know, they're selling $2 or $1 bills for $2. So, I think that's a little bit bearish crypto at the margin because that source of demand, especially for Ethereum, I think is going to dry up now because the joke's over. Uh, on gold, I mean, it was kind of priced similar to the dollar for like complete US Armageddon. And I mean, it sounds weird to say, but policy is

[00:50:01] actually going down now. So to me, like I don't love gold up here. Like I think the trend is probably still higher gold, but similar to my view on the dollar, I I think I would stay away from gold here probably for the next 200 bucks and then probably be a buyer. >> Nice. Well said. All right, guys. That was a ton of fun. Really enjoyed that. Um, thanks for joining us for this inaugural board guidance FOMC live stream. We'll have to do it again in September or something. >> Awesome. >> Thanks for the >> Thanks for having me. Thanks for thanks for having me.
