[00:00:00] Hello my friends. Today is April 19th and this is Markets Weekly. So this past week we got a lot of chop in the markets and overall I thought it was pretty uneventful. However, we did have some pretty big developments on the policy front. Specifically, it seems like President Trump is more and more intent on firing Cher Powell. And of course, we got some updates on the trade front as well. So, first let's talk about Trump's war on the Fed. And secondly, let's talk about the ongoing trade war. Starting with the Fed. Now, first, let's have some context. Now, the Trump administration has only been in power several weeks, but already they've been making some pretty big changes. I think of it as a counterrevolution across our institutions. The Trump administration has been getting rid of DEI, slimming down the government, abolishing entire agencies, putting pressure on institutes of higher learning, and of course trying to get their own people into positions of influence. Now, this is totally

[00:01:02] normal when it comes to some positions, say Treasury Secretary, but there are also agencies within the federal government that are commonly thought of as independent. Now, President Trump has been trying to take over these institutions by firing uh Democratic members of these independent institutions and and trying to replace them with his own people. Um there are legal challenges seeing whether or not Trump can do this. Of course, uh for example, can President Trump fire Democratic FTC commissioners and then try to put his own people in? Now, all this is going to be ultimately decided by the Supreme Court. President Trump would say that, you know, I won an election. I have a popular mandate. I have to carry out the popular will and to do that, I need to get my people in those positions. So, this is ultimately something that's going to be decided by the Supreme Court. Now, the worry about this to many people is that if President Trump can say, you know, replace FDC commissioners, does that mean that he can also choose his own Fed chair and

[00:02:03] Fed board members? Does that challenge the independence of the Fed? And if so, what does that mean for markets? Okay, so that's the backdrop and that brings us to last week. So on last week, we heard from Cher Paul who gave an interview and the here are some of the highlights of what he said. Some people believe the Fed will intervene if the stock market plummets, the so-called Fed put. Are they correct? I'm going to say no with an explanation. So what what I think is going on in markets is um markets are processing uh what's going on and you know it it's really the policies particularly the trade policy and and really the question is where's that going to come in where's that going to land and we don't know that yet and until we know that you can't really make informed assessments that would still be highly uncertain once you know what the policies are it

[00:03:03] will still be highly uncertain what the economic IC effects will be so so basically first off he's telling everyone that no the Fed is not going to save the equity market but then he goes on he talks about saying that you know we got a lot of things happening in the world right now big changes on policy and what the Fed is going to do is that they're just going to sit tight and they're going to look at the data and then respond to the data. Basically he's not signaling that he's going to cut rates anytime soon. He's basically committing to being late because when the weakness shows up in the data by that time it will already be late and this I guess this not willing this unwillingness to cut rates seems to have enraged President Trump because the day after he has a press conference with U Italian minister and uh he he talks this way about the Feder on Jerome Powell you said that the termination of Jerome Powell cannot come fast enough he says he won't leave Even even if you ask him to. Oh, he'll leave. If I ask him to, he'll be out of there. But I I don't think he's I don't think

[00:04:04] to do that. I don't think he's doing the job. He's uh too late. Always too late. A little slow. And I'm not happy with him. Uh I let him know it. And uh oh, if I want him out, he'll be out of there real fast, believe me. Uh so basically he's he's very clearly telling you that you know I'm not happy with Chal and I want to get rid of him. And we also have leaked stories in major media publications saying that no Trump has been thinking about firing the Fed for a long time. And he's even talked about um firing the Fed and replacing him with Kevin Walsh who was a former Fed governor and in 2018 was also one of the front runners to be uh Fed chair at the time. Now, why does Trump want to want to fire the Fed? In his own words, so prices haven't gone up. The only thing that's gone up actually is interest rates because we have a Federal Reserve chairman that is playing politics.

[00:05:05] Basically, he thinks that the Fed is being political and he thinks that uh basically the Fed is trying to screw him. So, he wants to get his own person in. Now, the strange part of all this is, of course, if anyone of you knows about the history of Kevin Walsh, you'll know that he is actually super hawkish. And honestly, probably hasn't made very good policy choices over the past 20 years. So, it's it's unclear why Trump, who is unhappy with Trip Powell because Paul is not cutting rates, would replace him with someone who has a very long history of being very hawkish. But, in any case, that seems to be the current stance. Now, this is very concerning to markets because when the markets see a president being able to replace a Fed chair or Fed governors or basically toying with monetary policy, the markets think that, you know, maybe the United States is losing independent monetary policy and immediately they begin to be afraid of a scenario. Um, what comes to mind immediately of course is Turkey. Now,

[00:06:06] President Ergodon in Turkey is well known for his influence on monetary policy. Basically appointing yesmen and to be governor of the central bank of Turkey and of course Erdogan is well known for his unorthodox view of monetary policy. Whereas when inflation is high, he thinks that the central bank should cut rates and that that actually has not worked out very well. Now that being said, Ergodon has been able to win popular elections in Turkey. He's continues to be popular though notably less so than than than before. So the market is afraid that you know if President Trump gets this way that this is really bad for financial markets and I think uh the market is that would be the market reaction of course and so news reports also suggest that Secretary of Treasury Basson is telling President Trump this is not a good idea and Kevin Walsh himself is saying that you know thanks for thinking about me but can you not do this you know maybe you could do this next year when Cher Pow's term is

[00:07:07] up but if you fire the Fed sure that's really So that's what the market is concerned of. And we actually have some really interesting work uh from Professor Hano of Stanford who does good work. I've read a number of his pieces on the topic where he looks at the data the past couple weeks and suggests that yes, there's actually some indicators in the market that uh the dollar is losing some of its luster. What the professor looks at is the spread between FX hedged German bun yields and the one-year Treasury yield. Now, historically speaking, now one-year Treasury yields are going to be lower than say FX hedged German bun yields because there is a premium to hold US assets. US treasuries very liquid, very safe, reserve currency and all that. So people are willing to hold assign a premium to that and accept lower yields in con compared to even German bonds again hedging for FX

[00:08:07] currency risk. Now what the press professor found is that actually that's going away that that extra would say um premium treasuries command in compared to FX hedged German bonds is just not there anymore and the disappearance of that coincides with uh the dollar depreciating significantly against the euro during the past two weeks of turmoil. So that is a little bit of an indicator that foreign investors really are becoming more concerned about um the status of the dollar. But of course we also have to keep in mind that you know there is some degree of panic to all this losing reserve currency, Trump taking control of Fed policy and so forth. Now in the US again the president appoints the Fed chair but that's also subject to confirmation by the Senate. So, it's not like Trump can appoint Don Jr. and then have Don Jr. run monetary policy. And of

[00:09:07] course, at the end of the day, even if President Trump does not fire Cher Powell, he's going to get to appoint his own Fed chair and next year when Cher Powell's term expires. So, does one year make a difference? I don't know. Maybe next year everyone can also have the same freakout. But in any case, it is very much something that is alarming the markets. But let's also look at this from President Trump's perspective as well. Now, to be clear, President Trump and Cher have had a rocky history. During President Trump's first term, he very, very memorably tweeted out this pondering out loud. Is the enemy President Xi of China or Chair Powell? Of course, very upset that Chair Powell uh was not cutting rates back in 2018. And ultimately u cher pow did cut rates in 2019 and uh it seemed like President Trump warmed up to to powo a bit more after that. But again we're kind of in a dja vu where that same

[00:10:09] thing is playing out over again. So if you're looking at things from Trump's perspective, I think what Trump is thinking is that he's afraid that the Fed is being politicized as he again obviously noted and that they are not acting as an independent agency but acting basically against the president and it's not unreasonable for him to think that over the past few years he's seen many a many institutions that should be um independent actually go after him. And of course, there's this very memorable op-ed by former New York Fed President Dudley in 2019 suggesting that, you know, the Fed should conduct monetary policy in a way to push Trump out of office. Now, President Dudley, uh, former New York Fed President Dudley was the third most important person at the Fed at a time. So, this really is a top level former Fed official. In addition, President Trump is probably looking at the Fed cutting rates by 50 basis points right before the election

[00:11:09] last year, acting preemptively, and then looking at the Fed today with oil prices down, egg prices down, and other central banks around the world cutting, and then suddenly the Fed deciding not to act preemptively even as the economy slows. That obviously is it looks suspicious to President Trump, and we don't know whether or not it's politically motivated. can't peer inside someone else's head. But that's the concern uh from from his perspective. So, we're going to figure out in the coming weeks whether or not that um Cherpal really is fired. Now, President Trump has said that he's going to ratchet up the political pressure hugely and you see inklings of that already. There are tweets by Elon piling pressure on the Fed and I would expect more and more allies of the president to continue to say that and yes this would be very disruptive for the markets if this were to happen. Um okay now the second thing that I want to talk about is updates on the trade war. So this past week we had Japan come top level negotiations with

[00:12:11] President Trump and it seems like they left without really anything resolved. Reporting subsequently from Japan suggests that what the president really is is upset about is that they want Japan to pay more money because the US's military bases in Japan. Um thus supporting thus basically protecting Japan wants Japan to shoulder more of that burden. Uh wants the Japanese to buy more American cars. Again uh American cars are not that popular in Japan and to be fair they aren't very popular in many places outside of the US. and they also want to fix the trade u trade situation have want to have more balanced trade. So, not sure what could be done to help that, but I think that's what the ministry wants. And Japan has always been a very good ally with the US. So, I'm sure they'll work something out. Now, on the European Union front, we had Prime Minister George Maloney of Italy come. It seemed to be a very successful news conference with the President Maloney. Now, Maloney among European leaders is is a bit more closer

[00:13:14] politically to President Trump. uh at the press conference she emphasized their agreement on things like um controlling immigration and so forth. So so basically it's the European Union sending the most Trump friendly face to the US to try to come up with a discussion and what uh Premier Prime Minister Maloney seems to want is for Trump to come to Italy and then have a summit at the European level to thus discuss trade and Trump seemed to be pretty confident that they would ultimately reach a deal. But again, all of this is preliminary and nothing has been set. Now, the biggest move of course has to do with um China. And on the China front, there really doesn't have to be seem to have been much development. In fact, on Friday at the White House website, Trump unveiled this. Now obviously this is uh this is basically blaming the co uh pandemic on China saying that there were uh potentially Chinese origins of the co

[00:14:14] virus for to be clear uh today we know that this is a very very reasonable um hypothesis for where co came from. Obviously, there was a coronavirus lab in Wuhan, and many people of course suspected this at the time as well, although there was tremendous suppression of this theory a few years ago. But now, here's President Trump kind of parading this on the White House website. And uh reports suggest that President Xi really doesn't like this. So, it seems like the trade negotiations are not going super well. Now, what I thought interesting about trade so far is that we've been focusing things a lot from the US perspective, thinking that this would be bad for growth and also inflationary. But the ECB meeting this past week with Madame Lagard shows a different perspective that I thought was pretty interesting. Here's what she said. Falling global energy prices and appreciation of the euro could put further downward pressure on inflation. This could be reinforced by lower demand for Euro area exports owing to higher

[00:15:17] tariff and a rrooting of exports into the Euro area from countries with over capacity. Adverse financial market reactions to the trade tensions could weigh on domestic demand and thereby also lower inflation. So from the European perspective, this trade war is actually a negative demand shock. In the US, it's a negative supply shock because the US imports tremendous amount of stuff. Suddenly, maybe we're not importing as much. So that suggests potentially higher prices and slower growth. From the European side, they are an exporter. So this trade war is actually having a very different impact. If it's a negative demand shock, what that means is lower growth, but also lower inflation. And so the European the ECB cut rates and the market thinks they will continue to cut rates. Now if you look across asset classes oil is down again Europe major importer of energy. So that's downward in downward pressure

[00:16:18] on inflation. But Madame Lagard also made a very interesting observation that trade will be rerouted to Europe. What she's saying is that now that China again the largest exporter of the world, workshop of the world has is having more trouble selling into the US then they are probably going to reroute goods and maybe flood to Europe. So there's going to be down pressure on Europe and many other countries as well uh simply because the Chinese are producing all sorts of stuff and they got to go somewhere. So even though it's potentially leading to higher prices in the US, it's actually leading to uh disinflationary pressures in the European Union and um other countries as well. So very interesting perspective I thought and so this suggests further divergence in monetary policy although of course the euro has been strengthening against the dollar due to things that I discussed in my note last week. All right. So, that's all I've um prepared for today. Next week is going to be even more exciting. I think

[00:17:21] the war against the Fed is not going to end. It will continue to play out over the coming weeks. So, let's watch that closely. All right. Talk to you all next week.
