[00:00:00] Hi. Welcome. And happy New Year. It is 2026, and in the first week of 2026, as has been my practice for much of the last 30 years, I spend the week looking at data. I'll start with a confession. I am a number cruncher. A number cruncher, and I do love numbers. Don't get me wrong. I'm not fond of abstract mathematics. I like algebra. I'm kind of okay with geometry. I don't much care for trigonometry and stochastic calculus don't even ask. But I do like numbers. I like the feel of numbers. I like playing with them. And I spent the first week playing with the numbers. It is that love of numbers that drove me to first start to summarize and report data statistics in the 1990s. I did it for myself. I was completely selfish. I needed the data for my corporate financial analysis and valuation, and I found that the data gave me perspective. It allowed me to make sense of the numbers. And since I had the data, I said, "Why not share?" And I've been sharing ever since.

[00:01:01] As my access to data has improved, the number of data sets I report is also multiplied. From a half a dozen in 1993-94 to more than 200 data sets now. So, if you're a user of my 2026 data, you might want to listen for the rest of this this session. If not, you're welcome to leave. So, let's start the process rolling. We should be in the golden age of data, right? I mean, you have talk of data centers, and we're collecting data, both quantitative and qualitative data. And not only do we have far more data than we've ever had, we have much easier access to that data. That said though, I don't know about you, but I feel less at ease now than I did 40 years ago. So, what I'd like to start with is the question of data. What the good side of data, the bad side, and why having more data can make you more uncomfortable than having less data. So, let's talk about both the good side and the bad side of data. When I look at

[00:02:02] data, there are four pluses I see in data. The first is, using the terminology of data analysts, is you're looking for signal in the noise. And God, is there a lot of noise around us. What am I talking about? When you sit down to price or value a stock or do corporate financial analysis, you have to make estimates. To make those estimates, you have to look at what's out there in terms of viewpoints and numbers. And guess what? Those numbers don't always point in the same direction. In fact, they often contradict each other. And you tend to say, "Hey, how do I make sense of this contradictory data?" So, when we talk about finding signals in the noise, we're talking about looking at that data pulling in different directions and trying to make sense of the data and coming up with a direction that makes sense for you. Signal in the noise. Second, it is undeniable that we live in a world of uncertainty. And perhaps more uncertainty than we've faced in recent decades because the global economic order that was put together after the Second World War is starting to break down.

[00:03:03] In the face of uncertainty, as human beings, we often react in fairly unhealthy ways. Denial is common. We get paralyzed. I found that data gives you two benefits when it comes to uncertainty. One is by letting you look at uncertainty in terms of range of possible outcomes, you start to think about what to do about that uncertainty. Second, there are tools that you can bring in from data, simulations, visualizations that allow you to confront uncertainty, incorporate into your decision making. So, signal in the noise, coping mechanism for uncertainty. Third, there's tunnel vision that comes whenever you sit down to do analysis. It's easy to get bogged down in details that don't matter. In fact, in the midst of analysis, it's difficult to figure out what matters from what doesn't. Everything starts to look important. You lose perspective. I've discovered that stepping back and using data to gain perspective, especially data across time, data across companies, is one way of regaining that

[00:04:03] perspective. And finally, we live in a world with a lot more data, but there's also a lot of misinformation, bad data out there. Now, I and I wouldn't love to blame social media entirely for this. That's on Facebook and X. But let's face it. It's all over the place. I see it on CNBC. I see it in the Wall Street Journal. People making up stuff and calling it a fact. I've discovered that the best pushback when you listen to these fabulous people who make up stuff is to go to the data. So, one of the reasons I go to the data is I need to know what's going on, and I'm not getting it by listening to other people. So, the good side of data is signal in the noise. It provides a coping coping mechanism for uncertainty. It's a prescription for tunnel vision, and it's a shield against disinformation. But there is a bad side. And in the bad side, here are the things you need to worry about. It is true as human beings when you feel more comfortable when you can attach a number to something. You notice it when you go in to get your health checked.

[00:05:04] It's, you know, you get your blood pressure checked. You I mean, everything has a number. And sometimes just getting a number on something makes you feel like you're in control of it, even though that's not true. And when you put start to put a number on something, it's also, you know, natural, I guess, to start to view that number as a fact, to view it as precise. Now, my one of the things I I mention my valuation class is num- the the classic response that number crunchers have to uncertainty is to add decimals. It's false precision, but it makes us feel better. The second is bias. We don't like to talk about bias in finance. We like to play the, you know, play the game of objectivity. We're being objective. There's no bias in this process. But that's a lie. All analysts are biased. That bias might come from things you already have brought to the table, your priors, your preconceptions. We're all biased in different degrees and in different directions. And if you're a practitioner, that bias

[00:06:06] gets added on to by the fact that you get rewarded or punished based on outcomes. And that can lead to bias. When you're biased, it plays out in the data. Now, it's the you know, there's there's a book called Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics of how you can use statistics to kind of push lies to the forefront. And it's it's clear that with bias, people selectively pick the data that backs up their preconceptions. More dangerously though, sometimes this happens subconsciously. In other words, you keep telling yourself you're not biased, but the way you pick numbers reflects your biases, and you're not even being honest about the bias because it plays out subconsciously. Third, now, as many of you know, I've been tough on old-time value investing. By old-time value investing, I'm talking about the strand of value investing that started with Ben Graham and fed all the way through the second half of the 20th century. Now, basically, I do know that there

[00:07:06] are, you know, deep-thinking value investors, but a lot of old-time value investing was just mean reversion. You bought low PE stocks, and you made money. You know why? Because low PE ratios reverted back to the average. You You claim that markets are overpriced when PE ratios are high. Why? Because PE ratios reverted back to historic means. It's called lazy mean reversion, and it's alluring because it works so much of the time. Mean reversion is a very powerful force. Don't get me wrong. But mean reversion's counterforce is structural change. When you have structural change, you don't revert back to a mean, or at least a mean you saw in the past. Much of the mistakes I mean, most of the mistakes we make in old in investing come from not recognizing structural change when it happens. You're seeing it play out right now, right? In the AI debate. There are two two schools of thought in AI, and both that I think are wrong. One is that stocks must be overpriced because everything looks so

[00:08:06] high relative to historic norms, mean reversion. The other is stocks are correctly priced because we're in a new world order. There's been a structural break. Both are lazy, and I think we need to use the data to kind to find a middle to try to find a middle ground. Finally, I think with data, there is this danger that the more you let data talk, the less your voice gets heard. In other words, now, I see people, especially people who are true believers in data, who act like their data engineers, that their role is just let the data tell you what the outcome is, and that they're bystanders. In fact, often they use it as an excuse for saying, "I didn't do it. The data did it." When they're putting out recommendations and making suggestions based on the data that you're supposed to follow. So, data has a good side and a bad side. And what we're seeing with the explosion of data we have around us, it's both sides coming to play. Now, as the access to data has become richer and deeper, data people There are people who think of this is a utopian

[00:09:06] world we're going to enter into, where the data is going to drive our decision making. We're therefore going to have much better policy resulting. I'm not so sure. I think when I look around, I see analysts complaining that they have too much data, not too little. And they're struggling with data overload. At the same time, a version of Gresham's law seems to kick in, where bad data drives out good data. And what you see presented as a fact is often wrong. I know, I'm not one for giving advice, but, you know, if my advice, you know, offered very delicately, if you want to take it, with data is the following. One is where and I would like you to use this advice even as you use my data. When you look at data, consider who put together the data and the biases and priors of the data provider. When you have a data provider that has strong biases, the data that the data that they will report will reflect those biases. Second, don't use the data as a black box. If you're uncertain about how

[00:10:07] something is estimated, you're in very dangerous ground using it. And and from the perspective of my data, if you're using my equity risk premium, so please do try to figure out where those numbers come from rather than than using the data as if it were the truth. And third, to the extent that you can cross-check with other data providers, do so to make sure that you're that there's consistency. Cuz if you have an outlier, the outlier is either doing something very revolutionary and right or the outlier is wrong. So, you need to to consider those differences before you use data. So, with that long lead-in, let me talk a little bit about what my data sets include. I think the first time I I started to put these data sets together was 1993. And to show you how much more of a climb there was then, I mean, I did not have access to raw data easily. I actually bought my data

[00:11:07] from Value Line, a service that's been around since the 1960s. And the reason I bought it from them is they actually provided the data on a compact disc, on a CD. Surely, I mean, I don't even think most computers have CD players anymore. It came on a CD, which is a huge benefit because you could now put the CD into your computer and actually read the data rather than try to enter the data by hand. It had only about you know, less than 2,000 companies, all US companies, and it only reported a subset of data that Value Line thought was important. That was in 1993. I used the data. I created maybe seven, eight, nine data sets, and I did it for myself. Again, I did it because I needed that that data to do my corporate finance and valuation. So, that was in 1993. 2025, just to show you how much things have changed, I have access to far more data. It is true, I'm lucky. I'm lucky because my NYU affiliation gives me access to S&P Capital IQ, and it's a great, amazing,

[00:12:09] global data set. Now, and a Bloomberg terminal, which I use to get some market data. I also supplement this with subscriptions to other data to online data, some free, like the Moody's ratings you can download for free, and some which I have to pay for, but not a lot. So, my but I have a lot more data. And because but it's worth emphasizing that while I use these raw data providers, almost all the data that I use, in fact, I I would say all the data. I can't think of a single data item that is proprietary. Almost all of the data that I use from the raw data providers is in the public domain. The only benefit you have by having a data service is all in one place, and it's convenient to access and to download. So, that's the first thing to recognize is the raw data. Now, the data variables that I compute reflect my interests. And if you find a data item that you would like that's not on that list, and you say, "Why is it

[00:13:10] not in the list?" It's because I don't use it. I'm not saying you're wrong for using it, but I don't use it. That said though, I do cover a whole range of very different data items. With starting with corporate governance, where I look at inside of CEO and institutional holdings. And I look at aggregate operating numbers, employee count and compensation. For hurdle rates I estimate, and these are these are my specific estimates for beta and risk and equity risk premiums, and and cost of equity and capital. I look at accounting returns as well as excess returns that companies earn over those um you know, when they invest in projects. I also look at how companies do in the market as a market alpha. On a financing front, I look at you know, numbers that capture how much debt companies have, what their ratings and default spreads are, what tax rates they face. And in terms of financing type, I know long-term, short-term debt, fixed rate, floating rate debt, the debt details as well as leases, which I used to separate out and and and talk a little bit more

[00:14:11] in a minute to do. In terms of dividends, I look at how much companies return both in traditional dividends and in in buybacks, but also look at what they could have returned, potential dividends. Now, I look at yields and payout ratios, mention measures how much companies return. From the valuation front, I look at growth rates in both past growth rates as well as growth rates based on fundamentals, as well as projected expected growth rates. Now, I I look at our you know, R&D and working capital as reinvestment because I need that for my valuation. I look at profit margins and again accounting returns because they matter in valuation. And I do compute pricing multiples, you know, earnings multiples, book value multiples, revenue multiples, just to get a sense of what the pricing looks like across the market. Now, as I compute these these variables, there are two principles I try to stay true to. One is consistency. The way I define these multiples reflect the way I think about corporate finance and valuation.

[00:15:12] I'll give you an example. I have argued for three decades that lease commitments are debt and R&D expenditures are capital, not operating expenses. So, for three decades, when I've computed debt ratios, I've included leases as debt. When I include reinvestment, I've included R&D as reinvestment because that's a consistent thing to do. Now, I'm not an accountant, and it's not my it's not my job to make sure accountants do the same thing. In fact, I'm not even sure they should try. But in 2019, for instance, the accounting rules caught up with my views on lease debt. And I continue to report both my lease debt and accounting lease debt because there are still some differences between what accountants do and what I do. With R&D, we're still apart, me and accountants, but I report on both the effective numbers, things like margins and accounting return with with my adjustment and without my adjustments. The other rule I try to follow is transparency. Every one of these variables, especially numbers like accounting return on capital, you see a hundred different definitions. So, if

[00:16:15] you're interested in how I define these variables, if you click on that link, you will see how each of these variables is defined. You're welcome to disagree with me. You can come up with your own variations, but this is my the the variation that I estimate. Now, in terms of estimation detail, it is you know, remember I talked about my raw data providers, they provide data on a company level, and they're protective of the data, and I don't blame them. This is their the this is what they're selling. So, I you know, I I I don't report company level data. I aggregate the data and report them at the industry level. I have 95 different industry breakdowns. I report them at the industry level. Second, I think that if you need individual company data, this is my data service set is not what you want to look at. For individual companies, why are you looking at any kind of data service? Because the data ultimately comes from the financial filings of the company. For my global statistics, because I include companies from different

[00:17:16] countries within each industry, and these companies might report their numbers in different currencies, to make them consistent again, I convert all of them into US dollars, and most of the numbers I report are are ratios. A P/E ratio is going to be the same whether I compute it in Brazilian reais or US dollars, so currency is not an issue. Finally, when I compute industry averages, it seemed like a trivial thing. It's quite a challenge, actually, for a couple of reasons. One is there will be individual companies where that data is missing. I'll give you an example. When you compute P/E ratios, if you have negative earnings, I can't even compute a P/E ratio. You you drop out of my sample. The second is, you know, you can have very small and very big companies in the same group, and it doesn't seem right that you weight them all the same. Here's my solution, and you're you're welcome to disagree with me on this, is to compute the P/E ratio for an industry group. Here's what I do. I add up the market cap of every company in that group, and add up the net income of every company in that group, including the money losers. I divide the

[00:18:16] aggregated market cap by the aggregated net income. I think that's a much more representative number for that industry grouping than giving you an average or even a weighted average. Now, in terms of geography, as I said, this is a global data set. And you know, you can see the breakdown here. The global data set includes 48,156 companies, and I report industry averages for those global companies. But then I also report by subgroup, for the US, for Europe, for Japan, emerging markets, and the rest. So, I have about 6,000 companies in Europe. For some reason, that number of firms didn't show up. And and the rest includes Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. You're saying, "Why am I lumping those three countries together?" Because I'm not sure where to put them. They're and they share a few features in common. One is they're heavily driven by natural resource companies, and they're developed markets, but they're very different from the US and much of the European market, so I put them into one grouping.

[00:19:17] Now, part of my breakdown reflects my data history. Japan has been separated out because when I started computing in the these averages 25 years ago, Japan was a big much bigger market, much bigger both in terms as an economy and and as a portion of global market than it is today, but it's stayed separate. My emerging market grouping has become a little unwieldy. There are 27,360 firms, Africa, Latin America, Asia, but there are portions countries in those emerging markets that actually have developed market characteristics. Singapore is in my emerging market grouping because of geography and I've left it there because I don't know how else I could separate it. Starting about 10 years ago, I also started to separate India and China because they became large enough markets and economies to stand in their own. So, you would see on my webpage datasets global dataset and then these individual datasets for the subgroupings that I have reported here. Now, in terms of how I came up with the

[00:20:19] 48,156 companies in my sample, let me go back and talk a little bit about bias. Talked about how bias can lead you to look at the numbers that you want to see rather than the numbers as they are. One of the biggest source of bias is sampling. You can sample your way to whatever you want to find. So, I've always been worried about creating sampling bias by picking a subset of companies out there. So, here's what I do. I look at all publicly traded companies that have a market price greater zero. So, 48,156 companies is all publicly traded companies. That reduces sampling bias. You say, "Why doesn't it make it go away?" Because I don't include privately owned business or unlisted companies. And the reason I don't do it is because they don't have disclosure laws. It's not that the data service doesn't give me the data, but it's data is just not there for many of these companies. Maybe that'll change and when that does, I might bring them into the sample as well. So, in terms of what the world look like

[00:21:21] in 2025 by subregion, so I've broken this down into a deeper breakdown than the earlier breakdown. You can see that if you look at the end of 2025, the US with $69.8 trillion in market cap is about 47% of global equities. It's still the dominant part of the global market cap mixed. It's a little lower than it was a year ago. A year ago, it was 48.7%. And while the US had a good year in 2025 and these are all in dollar terms by increasing by about 10 trillion or 16.8%. Global equities were up 26.4 trillion or 21 and 1/2%. The best performing parts of the world Latin America, Asia um China, Canada did better than the US. You can see there are large chunks of the world that did better than the US in dollar terms. The worst performing market in the world in 2025 in dollar terms was India. You know, part of it

[00:22:22] was the fact that the Indian rupee lost lost lost strength against the US dollar, but we'll talk more about the geographical performance in a future session, but that's what the world look like in 2025. Now, in terms of sectors, I did mention that I break down companies by industry group, but rather than reporting 95 industry groups is a little unwieldy. I've looked at S&P 500 S&P sectors and these are This is the sector breakdown. At the end of 2025, tech uh tech companies were 32.8 trillion market cap, about 22% of overall global market cap. You know, the and you can see real estate and utilities much smaller you know contributors to the overall market cap mix. Real estate is because much of real estate is still not traded. Utilities because they're a small piece of a they're they're a critical piece, but a small piece of the overall economy. In terms of percentage change, the sectors

[00:23:22] that the the sector that had the best year last year was materials, 37.8% followed by technology and industrials. The worst performing sectors, you know, were energy and up only 5% and consumer staples 8 and 1/2%. But overall, you can see that it was a good year for markets, but divergent numbers across across different sectors. Again, we'll take a closer look at industry and sector performance in a future session. Finally, you know, the data is updated and you're welcome to use it, but a couple of things that you might want to keep in mind as you look at the data. The first is I create these data updates for practitioners in corporate finance and investing and valuation who are doing current work. So, if you're valuing a company today, you're doing corporate financial analysis today, the data should work for you as of January 2026. It's not designed for research. If you're an academic researcher, my recommendation is you should go to the

[00:24:23] raw data or use a data service which but if you don't have access to that for whatever reason, you're welcome to use my archives with two caveats. One is not all data items have a long history on my archives and second, I've actually had to switch raw data providers along the way, so you might not be comparing apples to oranges if you use my archive data. Second, if you do use my data, please please use it as a starting point, not your ending point. So, if you decide to price your company, don't just take my and it's a steel company in Thailand, don't just take my steel company EV/EBITDA that I reported multiply by EBITDA and say, "I'm done." That's a starting point. Your work should be to add on to that starting point, you know, rather than take the numbers as a given. Third, you know, if you do use my data, you know, you don't have to you know, get you you don't have to do much. You don't have to pay me for the data. It's free. But please take ownership of the data.

[00:25:23] In other words, if you use the data come to a conclusion, it's your conclusion, not mine. So, the fact that you use my data is okay, but your conclusion should remain your own. Now, one final point I want to make. In 2024, I talked about and I wrote about a Demodern Bot, um an AI entity that I am aware of that I know the person putting it in. I have a great deal of respect for that person and it's reading watch everything that I've put online. I put my entire life online. My classes, my books, my writing, my spreadsheets. And I talked about the threat that it posed to me and I argued that AI bots in general not only match but be better than you are on mechanical and rule-based tasks because they don't get tired, they don't need caffeine. And I talked about places where I can potentially create a differential advantage. I might be delusional on that. You're welcome to go back and watch that. But as I was updating my data, I recognized almost everything I did was mechanical and rule-based. And I

[00:26:24] realized that this was one aspect of what I do that I should be able to turn over to a Demodern Bot and the bot would do it better than I did. I know I recognized for instance on the fourth day of my data updates, I was getting tired and I was, you know, copying and pasting into the wrong place. A bot would never do that. Now, next year I plan to bring the my the Demodern Bot more actively into my data update part of of what I do. And maybe one day I can turn this part of what I do, the data updates as of the first week can be done by a bot. It'll outlive me and that's the good news or the bad news depending on how you view my data. More general message though, I think that as I look at what the bot can do well or badly, I think there's a message for businesses that have made it that make that make it I'm not for it's it's not so much uh now what I want to do, but there are businesses built around processing, collecting and processing data and

[00:27:25] charging high price for this for this service. I have a feeling that their days are numbered that AI can do much of what they do because remember what these services do is scrape up data that's already in computers, pull them together and organize them in a very rule-based mechanical way. And I do think AI can will be able to do that better, cheaper and much more efficiently than they can. More generally though, I think there's a message of a message of a quant investing. You know, quant investing is acquired this lure of math and genius math geniuses working with numbers finding great ways to make money. And of course, this legend is burnished by people like Jim Simon and Renaissance Capital, a hedge fund that beat the market for an extended period. Now, as I look at what AI can do, I do believe that quant investing will have to work a lot harder in the future to make those excess returns. You might still be able but you've got to bring in something that's not in the data to be

[00:28:26] able to make that money. So, I hope you found the session useful and but more critically, I hope you are able to use the data and just if you're interested in the data, you can go to my webpage, the link is there. You can go you know, if you click on the current data, you'll see all the datasets. You'll see a a webpage where you can get the data, but that's just the US groupings, but if you want the um the the the data in fuller form, you can work with it. Click on the Excel spreadsheet and you will get both you know, the data by subgroup and the global data. Or you can also click on the archive data and you can see the data going back in time. As I said, for some of you, that might be interesting. And if you're interested in how I define the variables, click on the data variable. And if you you know, and as you go through this data, I'm sure you will find mistakes and typos. After all, my bot didn't do it. I did it. Yeah. And I'd love to blame the bot, but it's not responsible. If you do find them, please let me know and I will fix them.

[00:29:27] Thank you very much for listening. And I hope you found the session useful.
