[00:00:00] Jeff, when I hear you talk about this, I think of the Tina argument, there is no alternative. Now, obviously, one answer is Tina is the answer, there is no alternative. We'll just basically continue to do what we're doing even though it's bad, it doesn't work. Another answer could be, well, the crypto bros we're going to work on making a kind of alternative crypto system, we'll use stable coins to kind of bridge from one world to the other. There's real world financial assets that are now being tokenized, that's another potential bridge. But, in some ways, the cryptoverse is kind of working on this plumbing. Where do you think we're going to go? Are we going to try to, you know, jump from a moving car to another moving car? Are we going to stay on the eurodollar system until something breaks? Where do you think we're going in the future? >> Yeah, I think the first part is true. Uh what you just said, Ben, is absolutely true. We're kind of stuck here, and it is a solution for the short run, although the short run has turned into two decades. However, it's not a workable solution because whenever you have, the old saying I use is that when economic growth, the rate of change in the in the economy goes down, rate of change in politics goes up. And the

[00:01:00] longer the rate of change in economy stays down, the faster the rate of change in politics becomes. In case you haven't noticed, that's kind of where we are in the 2020s. So, in many ways, we can't really stick with the eurodollar system, even though we're, you know, nobody's working on its replacement specifically. I mean, yes, some cryptocurrencies fancy themselves as the reserve currency of the future. We won't name any names here. The truth of the matter is, cryptocurrencies, which should be the natural bridge to the next next ledger money system, because that's what the eurodollar is, it's nothing more than a in a dispersed ledger, where the ledger is kept by, you know, banking banking cartel. There's all sorts of negatives associated with that alone, beside the fact that it doesn't work the way that it did before 2007. I mean, because the banking sector was the only way to create this global reserve ledger system, it allowed the global cartel of banks that operated enormous political, financial, way too much power. You don't want to have that kind of power in the hands of banks to begin with. Yes, it was necessary because they were the only industry available with the resources and the

[00:02:00] specialized expertise to pull off something like this. So, yeah, they were good in the 1950s when we needed the solution to Triffin's dilemma, which wasn't really a dilemma cuz they solved it. So, yeah, we needed banks back then, but you know, we can move beyond banks. We have the technology in blockchain to operate ledgers. What we lack is the expertise to scale them up to to the size and scale that we need for a global reserve currency system, as well as make them robust enough that they can be used in a reserve currency fashion. So, while there is some potential from cryptocurrencies and more more so blockchain, it's still way way down the road. We're several iterations away from actually undertaking and equaling the euro-dollar's capacity, let alone surpassing it. So, that's potentially a future and stablecoins are an extension of the current euro-dollar framework because like you said, Ben, it's probably best way to put it. They're tokenizing some real-world assets and financial assets together to put them into a ledger framework, but in many ways that's just kind of a half step into the future and it not necessarily doesn't represent it doesn't necessarily

[00:03:01] represent a full step into the next stage of evolution, which I think we should be moving toward to begin with. So, in many ways the cryptocurrency phenomenon is a response, even though a lot of cryptocurrency enthusiasts don't know this, it was a response to the euro-dollar break. I mean, they all think that they were the Fed's printing money. We need to we need to protect the value of the dollar, protect protect the value of savings. Instead, what they created was another form of store value financial asset instead of a workable currency system, which is what they were supposed to do. That's where the cryptocurrency revolution really went. Even if people didn't realize that's what they were doing, they were trying to solve the euro-dollar problem without understanding the euro-dollar was the problem they were trying to solve. And in many ways that has hindered their evolution because they've been looking in unproductive directions. Like I said, Bitcoin, perfect example. Bitcoin, the white paper from Satoshi says a peer-to-peer payment system. It wasn't supposed to be a Nasdaq stock, but it went over to become a Nasdaq stock because they were thinking they needed to protect everybody from the Fed's money printing rather than trying to

[00:04:01] work out how to create a euro-dollar alternative, a useful, widely available, widely acceptable euro-dollar alternative. And there's arguments about whether or not they could ever do that with Bitcoin, but that's a separate thing. So, I think in many ways, cryptocurrencies took a couple of unproductive directions, and then stablecoins kind of brought it back toward the direction we need to, which is, you know, a payment system, but still, like I said, they're couple of generations away before even coming close to challenging and recreating what the euro-dollar actually does, even if it even when it does it poorly. >> So, Jeff, someone might be listening to this conversation and say, "Wow, this guy Jeff's really smart, but I I just don't get how this matters to me. If the euro-dollar system breaks down in Dubai or the rest of the world, how does that affect me? How should I position my portfolio for some euro-dollar shortage or some dollar issue that I don't really understand? It doesn't affect my day-to-day life. What should I be doing to potentially, you know, guard my portfolio or guard my wealth from the things that Jeff's saying?" >> Yeah, the first argument, the counterargument along those lines is look at the stock market, right? You

[00:05:02] said the the economy's been in the toilet for 20 years, so how's the stock market at all-time highs, right? Where there seems to be a disconnect here. And the answer to that is the downside isn't necessarily the stock market having a bad day or a bad month or a bad year. The downside is the stock market continues to soar to new highs as the socialists take over in city after city after city, state after state after state. Because eventually what we're talking about here at the end of the day is an economy that doesn't function. And the reason why socialism's become popular is because the economy that we have today looks a lot like what Marx warned us about 150 years ago. It doesn't function the way it should, therefore, it kind of makes a crazy man and Karl Marx look look like he knew what he's talking about. And therefore, you've got everybody on the other side saying, "Look at the stock market. Look at how great everything is. This this system works really well." And a lot of people, and there are way too many people who are struggling saying, "What the hell are you talking about? This economy sucks and it has sucked for a very long time." And here in the 2020s, it seemed to have somehow gotten even

[00:06:03] worse. We went from millennials living in their parents' basement because there were no jobs to now those millennials living in their parents' basement have zero hope, zero future, and they can't even afford to live in the basement. So, the downside here isn't necessarily a portfolio or the stock market or assets. The downside is much bigger than that. It's structural, systemic. We are losing the system that we have because nobody's making the argument that we can get out of the situation that we're in. It's a two-prong problem here. The first problem is we don't have nearly enough jobs because the economy has been stuck in depressionary condition cuz the banking system won't create credit, won't create money, won't circulate money, then for everybody turns into rather than risk-takers, which an economy needs, everybody just plays it safe except for the private credit people who just go off into a bubble situation. So, it's None of it is productive. So, we're stuck in this unproductive loop year after year after year, decade after decade, which leads to economic decay. And it's worse around the rest of the world. Why did we have the great migrations in the 2010s? Yes, there were political developments that came along with it, but the reason why everybody wanted to move out of the global south is because suddenly the

[00:07:04] future that they thought they were acquiring in the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s just simply disappeared. Where did that go? It just It's gone. I mean, Brazil was doing well and some of these emerging markets were on their way, and then it just kind of turned off. So, the issues here are much bigger than strictly the stock market or portfolios. Though, I mean, there are absolutely some some spillover there in financial context, but I The argument here is much bigger than that. It's It's the systemic argument. It's politics, and it goes beyond strictly financial markets and financial prices. Before we go on with our video today, let me ask you a question. What if your gold could actually pay you every single month in more gold. That's what today's video sponsor, Monetary Metals, lets you do. And here's how it works. You still own the gold, it's still in your name, it's fully insured, but instead of just sitting there doing nothing, it actually starts working for you. Monetary Metals has built a system that turns idle gold into productive gold, earning real yield

[00:08:05] paid in physical gold, not dollars. No selling, no trading, no converting. You keep your gold, and every month you get more of it. It's a simple idea, but it solves a big problem. If gold is money, it should act like money. And now it finally can. If you're a long-term gold holder looking for a smarter way to store value, check them out at monetary-metals.com/snyder. Again, that's monetary-metals.com/snyder. I highly recommend booking a call with them today to see if they're the right fit for you. We thank Monetary Metals for their sponsorship, and now let's get back to the rest of our video. >> So Jeff, if someone's listening to this, wouldn't they say, "Well, wait a minute. If if the situation is so bad and the US economy is so broken, and then they face this kind of untenable system, shouldn't bond vigilantes show up and say, 'Hey, it's time to make the US pay their fair share on these bonds. I don't want 5% rates or 4% rates. I want junk bond

[00:09:05] rates because I'm lending to these guys who are completely profligate. They've no idea what they're doing. They have a broken system," says Jeff Snyder. So why are we not seeing bond vigilantes? >> Because everything you just cited is a reason to own safety. And then so unfortunately, the sad thing is, and this is the one of the most perverse aspects of the system, we value safety in government bonds. We see safety in government bonds. And it's not really because of the government's fiscal situation, it's really about liquidity. It's the fact that government bonds have the historically the deepest market associated with them. Now, because bonds are treated as, you know, reserves for a whole bunch of reasons, whether they be statutory or just in practice, government bonds have attained the status of being the safest part of it. And there's I mean some there's legitimate arguments. I mean, the Treasury market's most liquid market out there and in the way the system works, heavily collateralized, it's really about safety. So, just like we saw in the 1930s, I think people missed this point, too. All the arguments that were made to that are being made today were absolutely made in the 1930s. In fact,

[00:10:07] Warren Buffett's father made, you know, the same thing. You know, FDR is bankrupting the country with his New Deals spending, which I mean he did. Treasury market's going to blow up because deficits before we got to World War massive deficits that we'd never seen before. The The '30s deficits were larger than the Civil War, World War I. We'd never seen any anything like peacetime deficits like those. The federal government's going broke. The country's in the worst depression in its economic history. And what did everybody do with their money? They bought Treasuries. The yields on Treasuries kept going lower and lower and lower. Banks, financial counterparties, financial participants, nobody wanted to lend in the real economy. Just like in the 2010s, everybody wanted to own what is perceived of as safety. So, that's the that's the reason why we don't see bond vigilantes today is because stuck in this depressionary circumstance, it's depression economics, everybody wants to own safety. And the only people who don't want to own safety just did a bunch of stupid garbage that blew up a huge bubble that's about to blow up in our face. So, it's it's either one or

[00:11:07] the other and neither of those are really productive uses, like I said. So, bond vigilantism has been buried underneath depression economics ever since 2008. In fact, those two things go together. It was one of the most toughest aspects of the 2008 crisis because you had, you know, under George Bush, his stupid TARP thing, who basically broke with all previous convention after the 1930s and said, "Give me as much money as I can borrow or it's going to be the worst case scenario in human history. He basically blackmailed the country. Give me TARP, give me all the funds for TARP. And back at the time, you know, it was about a trillion dollars. A trillion dollars was like, holy crap. This is enormous. Today, it's a drop in the bucket, but that's the reason why. Bush said, "Give me the money for unlimited money from TARP." A lot of people said, "Uh-oh, the Treasury market's going to explode, the dollar's dead." And it was the opposite. Where we should have had bond vigilantism, you only had more and more demand for US Treasuries. And then the saddest part of that, the politicians eventually figured this out. They had figured out not necessarily where this was coming from, but they figured out we have a blank check. We

[00:12:08] can borrow an unlimited amount, and it doesn't seem to matter. There is no bond vigilantism. The reason we have deficits that are out of control is again because of depression economics. The politicians realized we can create deficits as as far as the sky can see, and somewhere there's demand for all of the debt that we raised in order to pay for that stuff. And that demand comes from the depression economics. So, all the stuff you just said, Ben, are actually symptoms of the economy and the system that don't work. And it all goes back to the sad history of of prioritizing and looking at government bonds as as as if they're safe. And it's really about liquidity more than safety. That's really the the original sin here. And because of that, we're kind of stuck in this rut where the bigger government gets, the worse the problem's going to be in the economy. That's the Japanese example to a T. The Japanese did more and more government finance spending, it didn't get them anywhere. And they just left them with huge amounts of debt. It didn't blow up the yen. It didn't blow up the currency. It didn't blow up the bond market. It just left the economy to suffer from because

[00:13:09] for all the stuff that Keynes got wrong, he was right about that. At the end of the day, when you get into these depressionary circumstances, deflationary circumstances, who really ends up paying for it? Well, the big guys that created the mess, they get bailed out. Who ends up paying for the the crappy depression economy that comes afterward? It's always the little guys. Always the workers. So, the worse it gets for the workers, the more you know this is the reason why it's there. And that's why we don't have bond vigilantism, there's a reason the politicians and governments go crazy. No politician anywhere is going to be able to sit back and say, "The economy sucks, which means I need to pull back." Cuz they'll be immediately criticized for their austerity, voting public will go nuts. Uh there's no political will to actually restrain governments, which would actually help the situation. >> Let's see if I can summarize the Jeff Snyder thesis, which is that, "Hey, this euro dollar system, it started to break down. And when it did break down in 2008, rather than saying, 'Hey, there's all this malinvestment in this euro dollar ecosystem, let's flush out the system, let's try again. It will be painful, but we'll figure it out.'" We did the classic moral hazard, which is,

[00:14:10] "Hey, let's bail everyone out, let's make things super safe." Of course, the bond vigilantes died because, "Hey, we have this super safe asset, right? We'll continue to kick the economy along, but not really fix the problem." And now we're in a world where because the problem doesn't feel like it's fixed, there's this K-shaped economy, this broken economy. People feel like, "Hey, we got to do something to fix this, but that something continues to destroy or reiterate the problem that we've created before." Is that why, Jeff, you think we've seen gold prices continue to rise? People feel like, "Hey, I know something's wrong. I don't understand a euro dollar system. The guy Jeff's way too smart for me, but I know there's something about this economy that isn't right. And seeing the stock market at all-time highs doesn't actually fill me with confidence, it fills me with confusion. And so, I want to buy an asset that I know is outside of this whole financial engineering system." Is that why you see gold prices rising in your view? >> Yeah, Ben, I think that's probably the best explanation I've ever heard for what's going on with gold here. And you could see it started right at the end of the 2010s. You know, gold prices started

[00:15:11] to rise in 2018, 2019 when people started You're right. They don't know anything about the euro dollar system. They They don't They couldn't care less about it. And really, you can understand where that's coming from. What they know is this isn't working. This isn't working and it continues to go on longer and longer and longer. I don't know what the real problem is, but I know this is whatever they keep hearing, it's not it. The more they say the economy is booming, the more they say the stock market is representing the booming economy, the more I know it's it's just complete crap. And so what do I want to do? Where do you I go to protect myself? This is the reason why gold is, you know, the age-old the rock that you want to depend upon in any big storm is because I think people are extrapolating ahead and reasonably so and thinking, "Okay, the system doesn't work, all the other financial assets are obscenely valued or at least, you know, not anchored to anything. If we keep going in this direction and there is nothing to suggest that we won't go in this direction, what's that going to do? It's going to eventually lead to what we should have done in 2008 but even more violent. Like you said, Ben, 2008 we should have taken our medicine. It would

[00:16:12] have been bad, it would have been really bad, it would have been harmful and ugly and disastrous and all the any bad words you can throw out there. It would have been a catastrophe. But it would have been much better to get it done in 2009 than to be talking about it in 2029 because in 2029, if we have to do that again and a solution doesn't arise from the bottom up and just take over like the Eurodollar did in 1960, if this continues to go in the same direction we don't have a solution for it, it'll be 10 times as messy because then we're not just talking about some banks failing and some people losing their money, then we're talking about entire systems that are going to be redrawn and maybe redrawn by some people we don't want to redraw the system. So that's where gold is coming from. Gold is like, "Hey, we don't like where this is going and nothing suggests it's going to change. We got to have something available that at least if it does get to be that bad, we have some stability that gets us the bridges to divide from A to B." And when we see gold prices continue to rise, what that says is more and more people agree with you. You

[00:17:13] might have started out pretty lonely in 2018, you know, not many people were talking about gold then, but it was pretty long. But nowadays, it's like, "Hey, everybody in China?" The Chinese are saying the same. Why are they buying gold? Cuz it keeps getting worse and worse, and nobody provides any answer. Emerging markets, like I said before, it seems like in 2008, they just flipped off the positive future that everybody thought was coming. It nothing has changed there. Gold is at the end of every one of these questions. If you don't really know what the question is or what the answer is, that's where gold comes from, and that's exactly what the demand for it is. And like I said, the higher gold goes, the more people agree with that. >> I want to offer three potential pathways out. One, of course, is with monetary metals. People own gold, these financial ecosystems where you can earn a yield on gold, you can finance gold production, this kind of real economy starting with gold, with gold on financial rails, gold token payment systems. There's this kind of gold world, and maybe, you know, crypto or other real-world assets. That's one kind of option. Option number two is that governments say, "Hey, listen, people are going to wise up and

[00:18:13] go, this is not good. We're going to lose power. So, Jeff Snyder, we are going to do a sovereign wealth fund. We'll make sure that people have a portion of this rising stock market. So, rather than saying, 'Hey, I can't afford groceries. Why do I care the S&P 500 is at all-time highs?' They'll say, 'Hey, it's a good thing the S&P 500 is at all-time highs cuz I'm getting some money from that.' We'll look a lot more like Dubai or Norway than the United States. Or option number three is that governments say, "Hey, listen, we're here to fix the problem. We know these crises keep popping up, and we're going to do more government control." Of these options, not only, you know, where do you see us going, but what do you think needs to happen for all these different worlds to actually appear? >> Well, hopefully the last two of those don't happen, because the third one, obviously, is what we really want to avoid. And I don't see the second one is too much different from the third one. Cuz if you give the US a sovereign wealth fund, it'll give it the US government way too much control. And for as many people who might be in favor of that idea today, just think about what it would have been four years ago. How would that have been used 4 years ago or

[00:19:14] 5 years ago during the COVID lockdowns? How much economic and financial power that would have left in the hands of the That's a frightful, frightful thought. What I hope and what I do think is has a fair chance of succeeding is what you said in the first option. Not necessarily strictly with a gold-backed currency, a modernized gold system, but a modernized gold system that competes with other forms of currency. I don't see any reason why we have to stick with one form of currency. I think you could have a government form of currency, you could have a gold form of currency, you could have a cryptocurrency, you could have a reserve cryptocurrency, you could have a, you know, an algorithmic stable coin that is backed by nothing. Let them all go out there and compete because the marketplace competition will sharpen everybody's ideas and produce the best results. And the best results could be plural. It doesn't necessarily have to be one or the other. So, that's not what the government's going to say. The government's going to say, "No, no, no, no, we we got our we've got our currency and that's the one you got to use." But ultimately, I think this is one of the biggest points of the eurodollar system as well as ledger money overall, the solution comes from

[00:20:16] the bottom-up. It's not dictated by government. The eurodollar By the time the government's figured out the eurodollar is even there, it was almost 10 years into the thing. It's actually probably closer to 15. So, by the time, you know, the BIS did its study in 1964 and said, "Hey, you know what? There's this eurodollar thing out there." It was, I mean, a decade old by that point. As long as government doesn't get in the way and actively try to stifle innovation like it was doing a couple years ago, you know, cryptocurrencies and digital currencies and gold for that matter, as long as governments don't stay in the way, there is experimentation, innovation, as well as opportunity. The opportunity to replace the reserve currency system is enormous. Think about that. What that would mean. Pioneering a currency that replaces what we have today across the entire planet. It would be absolutely enormous. So, there's a tremendous incentive to do it. So, I think, given the way history works, which is bottom-up, eventually, once we get enough capacity and technology and expertise, there's got to be a a level of talent expertise that goes along with it. Once you get enough of that, and you guys, by the way, are

[00:21:16] leading definitely leading the edge as far as the gold part of that goes. That's why I love working with Monetary Metals. You actually get it. It's like, "Okay, we get it." So, you get enough of these people together, and I think the future looks like we've got a gold currency, we've got a cryptocurrency, we've got a, you know, unbacked and people just whatever currency works best for them, they can use it. And there are exchanges that allow you to seamlessly move from one to the other cuz somebody's figured that out. It's not going to be perfect because no monetary system is perfect. Let's face it, human beings are flawed, and so every human system is always going to go through a boom-bust cycle. Pretty sure that's the case. We're never going to be able to regulate the boom-bust cycle away, but we shouldn't we should be able to recreate the prosperity that we enjoyed between the end of World War II and 2007. That, you know, approximately 75-year period was enormously beneficial to human society. And there's no reason we can't do it again, and if we do it right, it might be 100 years. It might be 150 years before we get to the end of the useful life. And I think doing it right really is allowing the bottom-up experimentation to yield the best ideas,

[00:22:18] test them in real-world circumstances so that they are legitimately robust by the time they're they get ready for primetime. >> So, Jeff, would I put you in the there is no alternative, but there are alternatives, and let's let a thousand flowers from currency systems to payment rails, let those bloom, let the market kind of create this robustness. Hey, we have algorithmic coins, oops, those crashed. Or, hey, we have this system of an exchange, oops, that's hackable, right? And over time, this decentralized system, where people say, "Listen, I don't know how money or currency works, but I can get 5% on this crypto." Or, "Oops, I put my money into a crypto that yielded 2,000% and it blew up." Over time, we'll get more and more robust decentralized monetary alternatives. What do you think are the biggest risks to that not happening or the biggest barriers facing those entrepreneurs today? >> Uh what you just said, Ben. Because let's face it, any disruptive technology doesn't have to be in the monetary context, it's anywhere. Uh inevitably will invite fraud and um mistakes, right? So, the biggest mistake is

[00:23:20] somebody oh I'm going to give you 2,000% on this cryptocurrency. I want you to use it and it's it's a fraud, right? I mean, that's a real risk and it's a real danger because let's face it, anything like this is going to invite all sorts of scams and frauds and let's face that's that's a lot where the the cryptocurrency space has gone in recent years. I think it's cleaned up a bit in the last shakeout, but still there's a lot of downside to that. People get burned too many times, they start to learn. Again, that's free market sense competition capital that's what it's really about. Capitalism isn't about money, capitalism is about competition. It's somebody who has a good idea and is able to take that idea as far as they can. In the monetary context, that means okay, people get burned by the 2,000% interest coins that are just completely scams, they learn not to go to those. They quickly learn which ones are legitimate. They go to the gold back one because hell, that one seems to be pretty freaking dependable, right? Maybe there's some downside to use that, but there's a positive side to use the other one. So, I'm going to I'm going to own both forms of currency. I use one for one thing. See, I think that's the answer here because we don't really know. Nobody today can sit here and tell

[00:24:21] you what the reserve currency of the future or reserve currencies of the future really look like. I think that's far enough into the future and far enough of away from where we are today that there's probably some kind of invention that hasn't been invented yet and it doesn't have to be a physical object that will unlock all of this potential. I mean, you look about the internet and e-commerce. What is it that made e-commerce into what actually you know, the promises of the dot com bubble. If you remember that you're too young, but you remember the 1990s, uh e-commerce was everywhere. E-commerce e-commerce e-commerce. You could actually visibly see the potential there, but it didn't really happen for another you know, 15 years. And what was it that unlock that potential? It was a freaking smartphone. Nobody knew what a smartphone was in 1998, but it would took a smartphone to finally unlock the potential of e-commerce. So, I think we can see something similar in, you know, digital currencies and modern currencies, where we don't really know what it is that just kind of puts everything together. What I think the positive thing here is that we've got people who are working on the various pieces, even if we don't have the way to arrange them just yet. People are

[00:25:22] finally working on the pieces in such a way that you can start to see if they get arranged in exactly the right fashion, it does lead to the future. The problem with that is, as we said earlier, the clock is ticking. The other side of it is we're stuck in the system that we have that seems to be unraveling more and more as we go along. So, we we need the people over here who are smart and doing things to get their going because over here you've got the torches and pitchforks that are being lit up and and ready for redrawing the system in ways that we maybe we don't want. You can be optimistic about it, which I tend to be. I think we'll solve the problems before we get to that part, but you also need to keep an eye on the other side of things.
