[00:00:00] All the rich countries on this map are dying, meaning that in these countries the number of babies born per woman, the fertility rate is now below the replacement level of 2.1. Therefore, the population of the rich world will start shrinking soon, dragging down these economies and threatening of their pension systems. But some countries are in way more trouble than others. Take, for example, these countries in East Asia and Southern Europe, despite having tried various policies to increase fertility, their fertility rates are now getting closer and closer to one very far below the replacement rate of 2.1. On the other hand, some countries, like the United States and France, have actually been able to bring their fertility rates back up close to the replacement level. So does that mean that the rich world can actually be saved? To answer that question, I've been diving deep into the latest research by social scientists about why rich countries are dying, why some rich countries are dying so much faster than others.

[00:01:03] And finally, how some rich countries have been able to stabilize fertility or even turn it around and to really go the extra mile. I've been doing some very practical research about what motivates parents to have one or more children. And let's just say that while I didn't sleep much, I definitely learned a lot. First of all, about Why rich countries have fewer babies? Because actually, the evidence is really clear on this. As you can see here, if we compare the fertility of some of the richest countries in the world to some of the poorest. The trend is clear. Richer countries have fewer babies. Similarly, if we look at the fertility of rich countries over time, we can clearly see that it has dropped dramatically as these countries got richer. Although there is one exception.

[00:02:04] After the Second World War, economies like that of the United States saw an economic boom that was actually combined with a fertility boom. But this proved to be only temporary, as after the 1950s, fertility continued to slide as countries get richer only to stabilize around the 1980s. So what can explain these trends? Why do countries have fewer babies as they get richer? But not during the baby boom? Well, while there are, of course, many theories. I could just find one theory that has really stood the test of time: the quantity quality tradeoff that was introduced by Nobel Prize winner Gary Becker. Now, according to this theory, parents care about three things. First, they actually like having multiple children. This is quantity. Second, they want to give their children a good life quality. And finally, they just want to have some time left for themselves.

[00:03:04] But as you can imagine, since time and money are limited, these three things need to be balanced. And while it sounds contradictory, this theory can actually explain why in rich countries, parents have far fewer children, even though they have much more money and typically also more time to see why. Imagine that there are two economies. The first is a poor economy where couples typically work on their own farm. In this poor economy, there are no good schools. So if a parent wants to give their child the best quality of life that they can, they simply need to teach them how to work on the farm. And while every newborn baby requires an initial investment in the form of food and care, they can soon earn that back as they work on the farm to increase production or help in the house. Even better, as their parents get too old to work. Children will take care of them in their old age. So in this economy, giving kids a good quality life is relatively easy and cheap.

[00:04:05] And as they get older, children will actually start contributing to a parent's time and income. Therefore, in this economy, parents on average, choose to have a lot of children. Okay. Now, imagine that this country gets rich thanks to all sorts of new household appliances, freeing up time and people earning much more money. You might initially expect that parents can now afford to have more children. However, given that children are now expected to go to primary school, secondary school and then to university, they can no longer do as much housework. And they can especially not contribute to the family's income. Therefore, when taking into account that children contribute far less to family work and are no longer the parents pension plan, we can see that giving a child a good quality of life in a rich society is actually much more expensive. And so parents naturally choose to have less of them. Or, in the words of Becker's theory, parents choose to have a lower quantity of children in a rich societies because even though they now have more income and time,

[00:05:07] the relative cost of raising quality children has gone up faster. However, as you might have noticed, this theory does not explain the baby boom, a time of rapid economic growth and increasing fertility. So to explain the baby boom, social scientists had to modify Becker's framework to take into account that men and women are not equal when it comes to who likely spends most of their valuable time raising children, especially not in the 1950s. You see, in those days, not only did women earn far less than men, they also only had access to certain jobs, such as those in the administration or care sectors. So a popular explanation for the baby boom is that as the Second World War ended, there was a sudden influx of women who previously worked in factories into the female job market. And this meant that the relative wages compared to men

[00:06:07] for younger women went down drastically. And this meant that it became a far more logical choice for young women to stop working early, to start a family and have lots of children. Taking into account the position of women could also explain why the baby boom eventually ended as the influx of women from World War Two factories stopped and the trend of female empowerment continued. Similarly, it could explain why for a long time, countries with higher fertility were also the ones where fewer women worked. And yeah, actually I had to look at my own family history and a version of the quantity quality trait of theory that takes into account whether women work can actually do it. Explain most of it. As the theory predicts, My grandfather, who was born on a farm in the relatively poor Dutch countryside of the early 20th century, was part of a large family. Then, as the Dutch economy grew, my grandfather, who was a mason, wanted to give his children an opportunity to get an advanced education, meaning that he could have less of them. But because his wife was a full time mum,

[00:07:09] they could still raise an impressive four children. However, in the next generation, fertility dropped once more, as I am only one of two children. Which makes sense given that both my parents kept working as teachers while still giving me the support I needed to go to university and even pursue an advanced education in the form of a PhD. So to me, the version of Becker's quantity quality tradeoff that takes into account how many women work is not just ivory tower nonsense. It is a really useful tool to understand what is driving fertility. However, while this modified theory can still explain why poor countries produce way more babies today, it actually cannot explain why some rich countries are dying much faster than others. But before solving that mystery, let's talk about today's video sponsor, Blinkist. Thanks to whom I was able to keep up with my research even while rocking my baby to sleep. Take, for example, 2030 by American sociologist Mauro Guillén.

[00:08:12] That presents the great trends shaping the global economy right now, including the global fertility crisis. I already read this book, but Blinkist was a great way to refresh my memory for this video. For those of you who are new to Blinkist, it's a fantastic app that enables you to understand the most important things. From over 6500 nonfiction books and podcast in just 15 minutes. For example, it's key points for Alberto Alesina's book about expansionary austerity. Included details about historical cases like Canada and Austria, where apparently austerity didn't shrink the economy. Knowledge that I then used for further research. I also added both books to my Blinkist space page where you can recommend titles, share your favorite books as well as notes about them with others or members of a shared space can access all titles in the space with or without a Blinkist premium subscription. So if that sounds interesting, I invite you to visit blinkist

[00:09:13] .com/moneymacro to get 25% of Blinkist annual premium subscription. And you can start with a seven day free trial, something that I can of course highly recommend. But before doing that, let's now get back to why some rich countries are dying much faster than others. After all, if we review the evidence today, we can see that among the rich countries, actually the ultra low, fertile countries are not the richest, and also they are the ones where women typically work less. So does it mean that everything I just told you about what drives fertility in a the Rich world is no longer applicable? No, But it does mean that there is a new reality today that we need to understand to modify the quantity, quality tradeoff You see, according to Harvard professor Claudia Goldin, the old way of thinking about women that stopped working when they get children is no longer realistic. In the modern world, most men and women

[00:10:14] want to combine a family with a fulfilling career. And a recent paper by Professor Doepke from the London School of Economics he and his coauthors make the case that the ultra low fertility countries are typically the ones that make it difficult for women to combine a family with a career. Now, in these countries, women typically want fewer children than their male partners because it affects their lives way more than that of their partners. This disagreement is really important since the same research indicates that if one partner wants more children while the other doesn't. A couple typically doesn't get another child. Therefore, it makes sense that to raise fertility, a country especially has to look at the partner, which on average wants fewer children, which are most often women. So how exactly do the ultra low fertility countries in Asia and Southern Europe make it so difficult for women to combine a career with having a big family?

[00:11:17] Well, I have selected three of the most important categories from Professor Doepke’s paper, along with the evidence to show for which country they matter the most. The first distinction is about differences in social policies between these countries. Now, social policies can include lots of stuff ranging from tax incentives to generous time off from work for new parents. However, the most important policy by far seems to be about whether or not childcare is cheaply available and widely available. I just emphasized availability because I've experienced myself that while childcare here in Belgium is relatively cheap, it is quite difficult to actually secure a spot for your child, largely due to a shortage of staff. And given that the Netherlands has similar issues, I think it's clear that providing good childcare means that countries need to combine subsidizing costs for parents with making it actually attractive

[00:12:20] to work in its health care sector, which costs a lot of money. Indeed, figure 20 in a paper by Professor Doepke clearly shows that there is a positive relationship between state spending on early childhood education, such as childcare facilities on the one hand, and fertility on the other. With higher fertility countries like France and the Nordics spending more on making health care available and affordable than low fertility countries like Japan and Italy. And because we were actually lucky enough to secure a spot, I've really never seen that child care makes a huge difference. If there was no childcare or it was so expensive that we couldn't afford it. We would definitely not consider having a second child because both me and my wife are completely willing to spend a lot of time and money on children because it's amazing and incredibly rewarding. But yeah, neither of us wants to give up working completely and as this research has shown, we are far from alone on this. However, one strange country is the United States,

[00:13:21] where childcare is notoriously expensive. So how can the US then still have a relatively high fertility? Well, that brings us to social norms, which much like social policies, sound rather vague. But research highlights three social norms as specifically important. The first is a norm about how involved men are when it comes to housework and childcare. As you can see here in this graph, almost all low fertility countries score very, very low on this metric. On the other hand, in countries like the United States, fathers help out way more. And this potentially offsets the effect of expensive childcare in the United States as sharing the burden with fathers means that women don't have to stop completely and give up on their career. Another important social norm, which can explain why a lot of, for example, Korean parents only have one child, is that having children is very time consuming. If there is an extremely competitive educational system

[00:14:22] for which kids need a lot of home tutoring. Finally, in many East Asian countries like China, there are still strong social norms that women are supposed to take care of their children, which discourages the use of childcare even if it is actually available. Now, the good news for Asian countries is that this problem could just solve itself over time. See, many of these countries grew extremely quickly, and so it makes sense that social norms need to catch up with reality. Okay. The final category of differences between countries is labor market problems, specifically high unemployment and job insecurity. And this can help explain why for a large part of Europe, namely the South, fertility is so low. Now, this one seems a bit weird at first, and in poorer countries there might also be high unemployment and job insecurity. But to make sense of job insecurity and how it decreases, fertility researchers have increasingly made a distinction between parents with and without advanced education for those without advanced education

[00:15:28] and unsure of future on the job market means that in many cases kids are just too expensive to raise, and these are still relatively rich countries. This could explain why, for example, we have such a high number of childless women in a country like Spain, much higher than in Korea, for example. however, for an increasing number of parents with an advanced education, the calculation is completely different for them. What matters is trying to have a career as opposed to a job. Now, if there is insecurity when it comes to your career, this means that you are much more likely to postpone having children until you have secured your career. Of course, on the surface, the outcome for, you know, poorer parents and richer ones is the same. They have fewer children. However, because the underlying process is different, that means that policy implications are completely different. For example, if you have a lot of poor or relatively poor parents, a cash reward, such as the $2,700 bonus offered by the city of Shenzen in China

[00:16:29] could actually do the trick. However, if you have more wealthy parents then doing the same thing, you know, just doesn't make up for a completely lost career. So yeah, to include a combination of lacking social policies, restrictive social norms and insecure labor markets can explain mostly why some rich countries are dying much faster than others. Okay, now let's use this knowledge to then finally answer the question How can the rich world be saved first, now that we have a deeper understanding about how the incentives for parents change as an economy becomes more advanced. I think it's really clear that rich countries simply cannot go back to ultra high fertility as seen in poor countries. The reason is that to get there they would have to do some pretty regressive stuff like discouraging education, reinstating child labor and stripping the pension system, which is not very ethical and also probably not politically feasible. In a similar way, I don't think it will be politically feasible for countries

[00:17:30] to go back to the male breadwinner model, the model that powered the baby boom, where women stay home and therefore have more children. After all, women make up roughly 50% of the electorate, and given that they've had a taste of equal rights, they probably don't want to go back. Similarly, I think that a lot of men, myself included, would be rather angry if governments seek to reduce the opportunities of our friends, wives, mothers and daughters to pursue their own careers. So then it seems to me to be obvious that the most viable option for ultra low fertility countries would be to just embrace a new world in which both a man and a woman aspire to combine a career with a family and make it as easy as possible for them to do so. Given that there are large differences between countries. Politicians from these countries need to make an evaluation first about what specifically for their country is holding parents back from having more children. In many countries, the most straightforward fix will probably be to make childcare cheap and available.

[00:18:34] Then countries with restrictive social norms need to encourage women to actually use these facilities. And finally, countries need to reduce the cost of raising a child. But depending on which country they're in, that can be very different. So, for example, Asian countries could seek to make their education system less competitive and their work culture is less extreme. On the other hand, South European countries need to just make their labor markets work better. And yes, I know that is far easier said than done. In any case, I hope that this video is made clear that even for countries like the United States and France, there is still plenty of scope to make it easier for parents to combine work with family, and that if this is done comprehensively, that it could very well be possible for the fertility rate to come back up to the replacement rate or even slightly above it. Just don't expect miracles. But that's my take. What do you think? Can the rich world be saved? And if so, will politicians in your country actually be competent enough to push through enough reforms

[00:19:35] to actually make it attractive for couples to have multiple children? Let me know down in the comments. Finally, of course, there are lots of theories about ultra low fertility that I didn't mention here because I didn't find the evidence that supports them as convincing as the theories that I have presented here in this video. But if you want to know more about these anyway and other theories, check out the paper from Professor Doepke and his team that have linked in the description of this video. Alternatively, if you don't like to read and still want to know more about the fertility crisis, I can recommend checking out this video over here by The Economist or this video over here, which is an interview of Professor Doepke about family economics. Finally, another thanks to Blinkist for sponsoring this video. Don't forget to check out their link in the description below and subscribe to them.
