[00:00:00] Today's episode is brought to you by Tukrium. Learn more about how agricultural commodities can play a role in your portfolio by clicking the link in the description. >> It's going to be soon. >> What's just press record. What's not well understood, Luke? >> I don't think it's well understood that the US faces a choice between losing to China in the AI race and the great power competition and maintaining the real value of the of the bond market. >> You're saying in order to stay ahead of China or to beat China, it would have to devalue the Treasury market. Why is that? simply because the inflationary costs of trying to keep up on the industrial side a that's going to be inflationary. We're seeing that and those are due to real supply constraints, right? We're starting to see that in AI where literally in the last month it's come out, hey, the constraint isn't chips. The constraint is grid. The constraint is rare earths. And these are not things the Fed can print. They have to actually get them. and getting them, they actually have to pay people to get them. And to pay

[00:01:02] people to get them, you've got to pay a positive real rate. If you pay a positive real rate, you're going to have wage inflation. You have wage inflation. The long end of the curve is going to go and at a certain rate, the long end of the curve going, creates problems. And so at that point, the problems feed back into the system hurts receipts. You've they basically have to do yield curve control in some fashion. if they want to reshore and even more fundamentally the US the deal is we offshore our factory base we offshore our jobs they send us stuff they being the rest of the world it's been heavily China the last 20 25 years practically speaking we send them dollars for the stuff they recycle the dollars into our capital markets so fundamentally there is it's I get accused a lot of being anti-American or non-patriotic all I'm doing is double entry bookkeeping and double entry bookkeeping doesn't care about your political views and the double entry bookkeeping is simple.

[00:02:04] The US can either if it wants to reshore which I think it should it cannot have re you can't reshore and bring the capital back here or have the capital here in your capital markets and reshore. You can't do the two opposite sides of the same balance sheet. You got to choose one or the other. And if you choose the resuring as you move the capital from one side of your balance sheet, the capital account to the current account if you will, side of your balance sheet, rates are going to go up full stop. They will. And the problem is like if US debt to GDP was 20% like it was in 1980 or 25%, who cares? You're going to have an economic cycle and whatever private sector washes out where US debt to GDP is 120%. We've seen US US equity markets economy doesn't handle 4.8%. 8% on the 10ear very well. So you're going to have to put a ceiling on that 10 year. This is in essence we want to run the World War II playbook, right? We keep hearing, oh, we're just going to go to wartime footing. We can do this fast. Go to

[00:03:04] wartime footing. Fed's balance sheet grew 10x in three years. That US ran 27% of GDP deficits. That's what needs to happen. Yeah. So that's what I'm getting at. >> I'm joined by Luke Roman from Forest for the Trees. Luke, you've got two very important tables or diagrams showing one the the rule book, the playbook for the past 50 years, the post 1971 US dollar reserve status structure, and then you have a slightly different table showing the proposed President Trump Treasury Secretary Besson economic plan restructuring. What are the subtle but important differences between these flow diagrams and what are the consequences of them for the American economy and capital markets? >> In the post71 system, it was we cut tariffs, we open up our markets, we offshore our factory base, the world sends us goods, we send dollars to the rest of the world. World invests in our capital markets, right? So we run a capital account surplus, current account deficit, and then we basically collect income taxes from our citizens and

[00:04:05] finance those deficits. And the winners in that system are Global Capital, Washington DC, too big to fail banks. They all get richer on a relative basis over time. And the USA and US citizens and in particular the US defense industrial base gets hollowed out via debt based consumption. And the flip side of it is what Trump and Bassant are proposing is essentially we increase tariffs. We reduce income taxes. The world sends dollars and pays for tariffs. The US sends dollars to the world for goods. world invest those dollars into US factories as we're hearing proposed in particular with Japan and South Korea to address address rising US demand. US in theory gives swap lines, dollar swap lines, or has the Fed do QE to to both supply dollars to the Japanese or South Koreans to help finance this or to finance existing treasury markets as capital moves out of our capital markets into our real economy. And then the world buys gold instead of treasuries with any net surpluses. And so in that world, global

[00:05:06] capital, Washington DC, the USA and US citizens and the world all get richer on a real basis over time. And the losers in that world are too big to fail banks and long-term US Treasury holders on a real basis via financial repression and the US industrial base gets rebuilt. So those are the two differences and who sort of the relative winners and losers and to boil it down it's the losers of the last 50 years are the relative winners and the winners of the last 50 years which is US deficits Washington DC and two big to fail banks on a real basis they're the relative losers. So in this new world that you see or a world we already may be in you tell me the difference is that the world invests US dollars instead of into US treasury it invests it directly into US factories. What is the take us from there into gold and the financial consequences? So ultimately the world if the world is going to invest in

[00:06:07] factories in the US then it doesn't also have the capital to invest in treasuries. In fact it may have to sell treasuries to invest in capital which puts upward pressure on rates and we can't afford rates much above where they are. We've seen that empirically over the last, I don't know, two, three years in terms of 10-year Treasury yields. That dynamic will require some form of yield curve control deacto. However that is structured, whether that's standing repo facility to help fund a hedge fund basis trade that keeps caps on yields, whether that is um removing the SLR um treasury exemptions as has been being discussed. if not implemented outright in some way, shape or form. It's all some version of the same thing, which is QE without calling it QE deacto yield. It's a way to keep yields from going up to problematic levels. That's fine. That's what needs to happen. However, the release valve is inflation over

[00:07:07] time. It also means that if you are the factory of the world in the case of China or if you're a energy or commodity exporter it it means the you can't store your finite reserves your finite production in an asset that is going to be debased uh by virtue of having to cap yields. It's going to go down on a real basis. And so you need a reserve asset that can serve that function whose value can go up against your your your finite production. And the only asset big enough, neutral enough, and that serves the that role is gold. And that's what we've seen, right? We've seen gold priced in oil has gone from six barrels an ounce in 2007 to 72 barrels an ounce. I think it's going a lot higher over time. >> The gold to oil ratio. >> Yeah. >> And so how do tariffs play into this as well? Tariffs in theory a restrict US consumption to redirect consumption into productive assets. It also helps to

[00:08:08] reduce deficits, the amount that you're ultimately going to have to yield curve control. It also in theory provides a price umbrella under which returns are satisfactory for US uh producers to actually start producing here. Again, I don't know that the tariffs have been big enough, not even close to what is needed to create a so sustainable moat to produce here. And the other problem is we've got too many policy makers who want to try to set policy for very long term projects based on a monthly hedge fund trader mentality. And I'm pointing right to Scott Bessant when I say this. You can't have tariffs. You can't say tariffs are 100%, now they're 50%, now they're 5%, now they're 10%, depending on which way the wind blows and what what his boss says. Because when you're trying to reshort production as the CFO or CEO of an American company or a global company

[00:09:09] for that matter, I'm trying to figure out a weighted average cost of capital and an internal rate of return calculation on a factory that is going to last 20, 30, 40 years. and my entire return on investment at 100% might make sense 50% maybe makes sense 10% maybe not and so at some point you just go you know what we are not doing it and unfortunately I think when you look at the USISM November number which is recessionary new orders recessionary employment recessionary and manufacturing despite a boom going on in AI so if you somehow could strip out the AI related spending out of manufacturing out of the November ISM. It has to be a 14 karat disaster. And I understand why because look, if I'm sitting in a CFO's seat and I'm watching the circus I've watched for the last 10 months about tariffs, I can't plan a long cycle project based on hedge fund manager moving tariff

[00:10:11] rates around that fast. So that's the theory of I think what they're trying to do with tariffs. And the theory of it makes sense. The reason I say it, they weren't nearly big enough is for me, I go back to something I wrote a little over two years ago, which was Josh Wolf gave a testimony to Congress in which he highlighted that the cost per gawatt of nuclear power in China is 16 the price of a gigawatt in the United States. A gigawatt is a gigawatt, right? It's not like it's a magic yuan gigawatt versus a magic dollar gigawatt. It's a gigawatt. And if it's one6 the price in China means a dollar needs to be devalued 87% against the yuan per gigawatt and gigawatt's about as fundamental a cost in an an economy as you get. You look at GDP growth against electricity consumption on a real basis. It's pretty tight over time. So when I say the tariffs have not been nearly high enough

[00:11:12] 50% doesn't really do it. And that then gets us back to our initial problem of do we want to reshore or do we want to maintain the real value of the bond market. If 50% me I'll pay the 50% I'll leave the stuff in China and that's what you hear a lot of manufacturers saying doesn't make sense here. Okay. What's the price that would do? I need the dollar down 87% against yuan. Holy cow. You probably need a 500% tariff. 400% tariff. I don't know what the number is but it ain't 50. It's not 100. Let's say it's 300%. 300% tariffs. Guess what inflation's going to be in this country in a few months? And then when the inflation readings come out, what happens to the long end of the bond market? And so now we're back at 485. We have bond market dysfunction. That creates a riskoff amongst the levered hedge fund basis trade that has been responsible per the Fed that of 37% of long-term Treasury issuance since January 2022. And now we're right back

[00:12:12] to risk off with yields up. And so everywhere you push on this balloon, it sticks out the other side. It's like it's the same choice. Hey boys, you the bond market on a real basis or reshoring. That's it. Those are your choices. >> Your point is that US Treasury assets, US dollar assets are just too high in value relative to the rest of the world. >> Yeah. This this is ultimately exactly like at the end of the day this is the catch 22 of having the reserve currency. This is Triffin's dilemma manifested in the real world. Like we can't compete making real stuff relative to the Chinese. It's not even close. Even with a 1500% tariff, it's not even close. And we can't afford the inflation of a higher tariff. And in the meantime, if we try to block out capital flows, well, that's a violation of the rules. Like, US dollar

[00:13:15] reserve status 101 post 1971 is you got to have a open capital account. You close it down, guess where the money is going to go? It's going to go into gold. And that's fine. That can work. But you get right back to that decision. What do you want? I feel like it's, you know, the scene of the notebook, right? Where he's looking at her going, "What do you want?" She's like, "What do you want?" And I I like that's what I would say to Trump, Bessant, Lutnik, all of them. What do you want? We want to reshore and we want to have 10ear yields and like what do you want? You can have 10ear yields at four. You can have them at three and and you can reshore. Absolutely. Sure, you can do those two things. Okay. What are the trade-offs? The trade-off is the dollar is no longer reserved currency. gold is and the Fed's balance sheet is going to go up about 10x in the next five years. What do you want? I don't want I want the dollar to be reserve currency still and I don't want the Fed's balance sheet to grow. Okay, then call up China and tell them to make more of your missiles

[00:14:15] for you because you ain't going to be making any of them in 5 years. That's it. Why can't the rest of the world finance the growth in this country without the Treasury market rupturing and needing intervention from the Fed because the money's already here, right? We've got 50 years of open capital account and in particular the last 25 years the US net international investment position in 1984 1982 1984 when Soros wrote his famous the imperial dollar cycle paper the US net international investment position was positive 10% of GDP that means there was more American money overseas than there was foreign money here 40 years later the US net international investment position is negative 85% of GDP in other words foreigners have 63 trillion gross 26 trillion net more

[00:15:18] here than we have there and so that money can't can't be in two place at once that capital can own treasuries and stocks and stocks are a key driver to our consump marginal consumption or that capital can finance new factories in the US but it can't do both unless the Fed says or changes the rules right SLR is just a down payment on it hey Mr. Japan Mr. rest of world. We are going to provide you a $26 trillion swap line so that you can have 26 trillion doesn't have to come out of US markets, but you can use it as collateral that we'll give a zero haircut to to also build our factories. And that's fine. Like there there's no reason conceptually they couldn't do that. But let's be clear about what that is. That is the Fed's balance sheet growing $26 trillion to finance the reshoring of our industrial base. And gold ain't going to be a 4,200 bucks.

[00:16:19] Stocks aren't going to be where they are. And the stocks not being where they are is another tricky part, which is why the hell would I go actually work in a factory or why the heck would I go invest in a factory if the Fed's actions to build the factories are going to send the S&P up 3x? I just sit here and get rich and sit on my hands. It's a lot easier. I don't have to get my fingernails dirty at all. I don't get big calluses on my hand. So, it's it's a pickle. >> Are you a sophisticated investor concerned about today's markets? With the everpresent potential for stock market corrections and the risk that bonds won't provide the hedge that they used to, you may want to consider adding an asset class that has historically offered stability when you need it most. The prices of agricultural commodities such as corn, wheat, soybeans, and sugar typically move to their own rhythm driven by factors like weather and geopolitics, not the factors that move more traditional assets like stocks and bonds. Since inception in 2012, every time the S&P 500 has had a correction of 10% or more, the Tukrium Agricultural

[00:17:19] Fund benchmark index has outperformed. Getting exposure to agricultural commodities has always been tough for individual investors. And while it's not possible to invest directly in this index, Tukurim offers ETFs designed to give investors price exposure to these markets. If you're a professional investment adviser or a self-directed investor managing your family's wealth, click on the link below to learn more about how incorporating agriculture into your portfolio can help diversification and protection. Thanks for listening. Let's get back to today's interview. Thank you, Luke. So these foreign investment deals where President Trump is securing what appears to be a very large number of dollars for the rest of the world to invest in the US. How much of that is actually do you think going to come to pass? President Trump had been touting a 21 trillion investment boom. I think a lot of people realize that was perhaps an exaggeration. Bloomberg came out and said, "Oh yeah, it's 21 trillion is only 7 trillion." I to me I was actually shocked that it would actually be that high. $7 trillion is not $21 trillion, but it still is an enormous amount of money. Do you think that this money is actually going to be

[00:18:20] coming into the country via foreign direct investment? South Korea, India, Saudi Arabia. Is this happening or is this kind of just a the president is going to secure a headline and then the actual the bite is a tiny fraction of what the bark was? >> Gun in my head, I think the I think the ultimate amount is going to be way lower. But what we don't know is the term of the deal, right? If this is a 20-year deal, then sure, 7 trillion, yeah, that's possible. But 350 billion a year over 20 years, eh? It's nice. It helps. It's positive. But it isn't if it's seven trillion in one year. Oh, by the way, if we did seven trillion over two, three years, number one, it's really inflationary. Go back to everything we said before about those implications. The other side of it is is, you know, a friend of mine who's a uh, you know, a special forces guy. He's really, really wise. He's really a warrior poet. And he goes, he says something, "Oh, you think about Luke? And in a war, the other guy get the other guy gets a say, right? The other the end of the day, they still can shoot back. They still get a say. The other side gets a say. And my point is that

[00:19:25] like consensus to me seems very heavy consensus. Oh, the Japanese have promised $550 billion. And to your point, is that 550 billion over a year, two years, 10 year, 20 years? I don't know. >> And is it 550 billion that they would have purchased anyway in stocks and bonds, or is it 550 new incremental dollars that would incremental dollars, right? And and and and yes, and I don't know. And I don't know. And then and the other side guy gets a say part like anybody watching what the Japanese bond market's doing. Like yields there go up big every day ending at Y. And it started at the 10-year and now it's going up in the two-year. Their front end is going up like rapidly, too. And I'm old enough to remember when Kyle Bass was pointing out like, hey, if the 10-year goes up, you know, 25 basis points in Japan, kaboom, it's over. and his math was dead on. I quite frankly am astonished they haven't gone kaboom yet. I don't understand why they haven't but and I think part of it is people said they turned it all out so it's not a big deal but now the front end's going up too. My point is the other guy gets a

[00:20:25] say right? So the bond market in Japan you know American consensus is the Japanese are going to spend 550 billion in invest into our country and totally agree there's how much where would have done anyway whatever but no one's having discussion of the bond the Japanese bond market's going no we ain't get out of here it ain't going to happen unless unless the Japanese do yield curve control again and oh by the way that's going to send the end down the dollar up and once the dollar gets too strong again then the rest of the world's going to have dollar issues relative to their and then they're going to start selling treasuries to raise dollars. They'll start, you know, they'll start selling US stocks to raise dollars. Wash, rinse, repeat. And so it keeps going back like no matter where you push on the balloon. It's like what do you want? You can reshore or you can maintain the real value of the bond market. Those are your choices, boys. That's it. And you better choose soon because you know the interest doesn't sleep and the interest is going

[00:21:26] up and the Chinese aren't sleeping. Their AI stuff is as Jensen said right behind and there's more Chinese engineers um you know than we have. >> Which door do you think President Trump and Treasury Secretary Bessett are going to choose between reshoring and maintaining the value of the US dollar or the US Treasury market? Everything I'm seeing right now, they are acting to concede AI and reshoring in order to try to maintain the real value of the bond market. And it's it is as so many policies of the American government over the last 25 years a pound pennywise pound foolish because it will ultimately in the short run preserve the real value of the treasury market for a cup of coffee until you know the Chinese at some point down the road we get chippy too chippy with them and they do to us what we did to the Brits in 1940 which is you know what boys and we know you've been reserve currency for the last 150

[00:22:26] years and the pound is an awesome currency and blah blah blah. We don't care. You want stuff from us, you pay in dollars or you pay in gold or you don't get it. And I'm not saying that would happen next month, next year. But that's where this movie goes, which is either we do everything the Chinese tell us or we get too lipped and they say that's it, we're done. You can pay in gold or you can pay in yuan. Good luck sourcing it and or you or you're not getting it. So, the government chooses AI over the dollar. >> I think ultimately, yes. I think in the very near term, just to clarify, I think in the very near term, they're basically trying to like I think they've realized like uh oh, when you see things like opening up H-1Bs, when you see things like the 600,000 Chinese students, et like these while simultaneously extending mortgages out 50 years. Um, right. So, like you're like, "Oh, here have a house. We'll make it more affordable." and then cutting labor costs while telling the US

[00:23:28] labor force like we're going to undercut every time you start to make more money we're going to undercut you which is what the H-1B and the Chinese student thing the foreign student thing into colleges is the message like that is those are both moves of like let's try to maintain the real value of the bond market a little longer that's the very near term but ultimately I think we've started to see hints of where this goes which is David Sax comes out the CFO of openai comes out and says we'd like to maybe like a backs stop and then oh Sam Alman's like we're not asking for a federal bailout and then you look at OpenAI's documents like maybe we can slide in under a federal grant program and then David Sachs is like no no bailouts for AI and then last week David Sax is like if we if it's a big part of spending and if we go backwards we're going to have a recession and I tweeted it I didn't think it was that big a tweet but it went viral got like millions of views it was if we keep spending if AI works it's going to undercut our industrial base our workforce and def deficits are going to go up And if we go backwards, recession, deficit's going to go up first. And then Sax came out and said, "No, I'm not advocating for ba bailout."

[00:24:29] So even in this, you can see the what do you want? We want a bailout, but we don't want a bailout. We want we So I think all like all of these inconsistencies in their views while in the short run they're trying to maintain the reval of the bond market. I think it's actually a manifestation of a shift from the five stages of grief around what do you want? denial, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance. These are the bargaining stages, right? We were a couple years ago, we were in denial like, "Oh, China's never going to catch us." Blah, blah, blah blah blah. And then, you know, we've also been in anger, which is, hey, China's actually doing pretty good. And I can tell you, you say anything positive about China on X with a big following, you're immediately, you know, a communist panda lover, you know, China, whatever. You're seeing bargaining amongst our policy makers. Depression comes next and then acceptance. And ultimately the acceptance part, yeah, they're going to give up the I think they have to give up the dollar in order to reshore and compete in AI. I think that's just the way it's going to go. >> Luke, you spend a lot of time thinking

[00:25:29] about the long-term consequences of very large fiscal deficits. And you know, the reality is in nominal terms, in dollar terms, very likely unlikely for there to be a fiscal crisis because it's just that the the government can bail itself out over and over again. real assets, gold, the stock market, maybe Bitcoin goes up and reflects it. But in dollar terms, there's no crisis at all. But when it comes to the private sector, there can be financial crises that sometimes the debt really is not paid back. When you look at the massive sums being spent on on AI, particularly OpenAI, one private company that according to one report from the Financial Times, HS HSBC, is going to lose half a trillion dollars over the next five years. How does that shake out? And is there could there be a crisis there that's going to make the.com bust look like kindergarten? >> I think the only question you need to answer that question is will the US government allow itself to lose the AI race or not? And I think

[00:26:31] that's what we just witnessed with this whole open AI, David Sachs, Altman back and forth, which is to say if they have a problem, China wins. And so if they have a problem, we can debate what the stake what's going to happen to the equity tier of these companies if slash likely when the federal government comes in to bail them out and to help them continue to invest. But it reminds me a little bit of I think a good metaphor for it was trading desk, sellside trading desks earlier in my career. So I was in the equity research and sales uh business sat on a sales trading desk for 15 years. And when I came into the business, you know, in the mid 90s, we had, you know, trading desk, direct connection to the New York Stock Exchange floor, executing orders on an agency basis for clients. They were still doing an eighth ace of eighth of a point and, you know, and then they went to, you know, 16. Then they went to decimals. And at some point in the early 2000s, he

[00:27:33] started doing computer trading, computer-based trading. And that became bigger and bigger and it got to the point by 0405 06 where literally the too big to fail banks were dropping hundreds of millions of dollars on the infrastructure of computer-based trading and regional firms even we were decent sized region we were top 15 regional firm in a lot of places you can we couldn't afford that you just can't afford that and so you get out of the trading business and a lot of people got out of trading and we started getting paid on a you know check commission whatever you know basis and the trading consolidated around a few of the big brokers who could afford the capital commitment of the computerized trading and I think that's a good metaphor for this which is the Chinese government's backing this and open AI or Oracle the hypers even Amazon these they can't compete with the Chinese government least of all because the American economy is sending China you know

[00:28:34] China's getting a trillion two in trade surpluses every year from the people that are competing against them ultimately like the US government if it wants to compete and win is going to have to backs stop these things and then we say okay so you know same kind of thing it's too big to fail AI is too big to fail and then the only question is how big a crisis how much do things go down and what's the equity stake the government ultimately demands to bail them out and what's that mean for current shareholders and I I don't know the answer to any of those questions, but I do feel very strongly that the answer is not going to be the US government going, "Hey, AI, I know that you guys took on all this debt and you're losing this money. We're just going to let you go to zero and let the Chinese win." Like, I think there's zero chance of that being the answer. >> And when you look at the AI picture, why do you see China as likely to jump ahead of the US? because we have the best chip designers and we have a huge leg up in terms of building the data centers.

[00:29:35] China they I think China is not building nearly as many data centers as we have built or at least have announced. >> My view has been China wins if we are forced to to a a to stop by the finances of this which is why I don't think we'll stop number one. But the other issue is just grid, right? We we don't have the grid. And there are some things we're doing that that we're doing these things because we don't have the grid, right? When you see us sending you look at the relative size of data center compute, like there's a reason we're going to the UAE. There's a reason we're going to Saudi because they can build it and they can build it fast enough and we can't. I'm hearing very credible rumblings, multiple different sources of land deals getting cancelled in very high traffic areas of data centers now getting cancelled for 2030 and 2031 because they know with a high degree of confidence they will not get a grid hookup by then and so it doesn't make sense to spend the money. And so I don't for me will is China ahead now?

[00:30:38] I gotta believe when Jensen and everybody else says, "Yeah, no, we still got all that stuff and we're building data centers faster and this and that." Then I take a step back and go, "We don't have the grid." Full stop. We're going to run out of grid. Arguably, we're already doing so when you judge some of the fact that that uh whether it's what uh Sataya at Microsoft said or or or others, right? I think it's getting to be pretty well known that the bottleneck is grid, not not compute. And then you say, "Okay, well, what else can we do?" And I think we're doing some of those things. Putting stuff in Saudi, putting stuff in UAE, etc., etc. Now, is that smart now? Absolutely. Is that smart 5 years from now? Are we sure China's not going to get any of that stuff, seeing as China's Saudi's biggest and UAE's biggest trading partner? Don't know. But because we didn't plan ahead of time early enough before and we spent our capital on the wrong things in the past such as wars and bailouts and things that had no payback, we don't have the capital. We didn't invest the capital in the past to

[00:31:39] have the grid now. So we this is the next best option and so we roll on from there and that's just sort of life and humanity what it is. So I I have to go with you know your point that look right now yeah I hear we're in a better shape. Will we always be in better shape? I will say this, for 20 years, I've been hearing from Americans, "Oh, China, they'll never catch us in fill in the blank." And that view has consistently been wrong over and over and over and over and over and over and over again. So, I I you know, and then you look at the engineers they are developing. When you look at the Wall Street Journal, you know, Meta just paid a whole 11 people some king's ransom of of engineers, right, in AI and seven of the 11 are Chinese. Fading the Chinese and working to catch up with us has just been a fool's errand for my entire career. And so I don't know why that changes now. >> You're absolutely right. In everything other than the stock market going up, China has outperformed all expectations. No, no doubt about that. Luke, tell us about the grid shortages. You've got

[00:32:41] these two great charts basically showing that China's electricity generation passed us in 2008 2009 and it's just skyrocketed since then and also you show that according to a admittedly a very rosy and bullish outlook that total AI demand in 2030 could be at the level of where all electricity generation is right now. So, let me I let me back up one second, just add an addenum to your point about the stock market because it ties right in, right? The Chinese made the tough choice. You have a choice. You can have asset price inflation and no grid, which is the choice we made. So, our stock market looks awesome. Woohoo. We're winning, are we? It looked like we were, but now we're not. We don't have the grid. The Chinese made the painful choice of hey let's invest in the grid and let's invest in our corporations don't make a lot of money but we have the grid to harness this new technology and now the Americans don't right so it's interesting the stock their our stock their our stock market has massively outperformed theirs up until

[00:33:43] about two years ago and all of a sudden their stock market's outperforming ours and so let's I think that might be a very important point and it ties back to what Do we want we want a grid? We got to take all that money out of the stock market and build a grid. But all that money in the stock market is what drives our consumer spending, which drives our leverage, which I or we print it all and the dollar is a release value. What do we want? Uh in terms of that chart, I think it's very powerful. It shows it was from our world and data and then Leopold Ashen Brener in his 2024 piece situational awareness which I think everyone should read is it just lays out that yeah that the Chinese grid passed ours in whatever 089 and in the last 10 years the Chinese have installed grid capacity equal to the entirety of the US grid and in the meantime the US grid hasn't risen at all essentially in the last 20 years and in part of that's because we've been offshoring our industrial base we weren't going to need it etc etc and now we're finding

[00:34:44] ourselves like oops were a little bit like the grasshopper and the ants fable where we're realizing hey winter's coming and we've been singing away all summer and starting to get cold. So ultimately we can do it but we can't do it without printing a whole lot of money because we can't take the money out of our asset prices because that creates a crisis. So it really comes down to what do we want? We do we want to grow grid or do we want to maintain the real value of the dollar in the US Treasury market? That's it. Those are the choices. >> Do you foresee a large increase in the amount of grid spending? Investment grade bond yields are super low. Why can't these highly rated utility companies just build and do its best to try and cast China? Not saying that we're ever It's looking like we're going to catch up, but have that chart moving in the right direction once again. >> I think it is. I think it will. I'm a I'm an investor in a electrical infrastructure private equity business. Have been for the last three years. Their order book is every quarterly

[00:35:44] update I get from the management. It's it looks like the Chinese grid chart, right? Like here's what our order book's doing up and to the right. And so I I think they're trying that. And they're in a race against time on a couple fronts. There was an article in the journal today talking about data center construction, talking about how construction workers are making 200 grand and it's not fast enough. And the other issue is because we've had 40 years of financialization. Um, you know, you're six to eight years to a quorum of your skilled trades aging out for retirement or death. And you've got to probably you've got to shift a bunch of them just in that direction. And then you need the engineers. And then you and even if you assume we have the labor, which we don't, and we assume the inflation doesn't create a bond market problem as we have higher wage inflation that we need, right? The market signal we need is higher wage inflation in order to get these the market response, right? People going into these trades and mass. Even if we

[00:36:44] had all those things, it is still a very long-term problem because you can't just start like throwing up generation capacity, etc., etc. The grid is a very complex thing. It needs to be balanced with peak and and off time off off peak loads and estimates. And it is a very complex thing that you don't just throw up in on a large scale basis in a year, two years. You're probably talking, you know, if we went at warp speed where we literally said the Fed can print whatever you want. We're going to let inflation go. We're going to let the dollar go. We're going to cap yields. It'd probably take you five, six years. Uh if you do it at sort of fastpac normal time, you're probably looking 10 years plus. And so we're in this really tricky time where a lot of the workforce is aging out in six to eight. If we don't go really fast, it's 10. If we go really fast, then you're going to have it goes right back to what do you want? Do you want a grid or do you want to maintain the real value of the bond market? Choose. Um so, you know, it's in

[00:37:48] theory we we could, but in you know, in theory is there's theories and there's pra there's theory and there's practice. And you refer to this as the mother of all crises. How real capital costs are going up. Not financial capital costs, but real capital costs. Explain that. >> All the crises in my lifetime have been pretty pretty simple. It's extend and pretend. Crisis extend and pretend. Let's pretend all this stuff that's crap that's that is illquid/inssolvent. Pretend it's fine. Add liquidity and add time. Right? Whether it was the Latin American crisis in ' 82 where like all of the US banks were completely upside down extended pretend just just mark the loans apar and uh and grow out of it great no problem 98 same thing 01 same thing 2008 as bad as it was same thing let's just pretend all this crap is actually awesome and print money grow balance sheet inject the challenge in this one

[00:38:50] is you need grit you need rare Earth you need silver. You need all these rare all these materials and the Fed can't print them. The Fed can inject liquidity. Treasury can inject liquidity. There are certain things they can do. But that then gets into this problem of the bond market. At 120% that's the GDP and Japan wherever they are. You can't maintain a market, a free market in bonds if you are going to address the shortages in the real world, labor, engineering, grid, raw materials. And this is where the Triffins dilemma, this is where that you had a great point before about in nominal terms, the US can't have a fiscal crisis. You're right. This is where it shows up. Once we do this exercise 82 87 94 98 01 08 we do it enough you know I've been saying for 5 10 years we kicked oh

[00:39:51] wait we kick the problems upstairs a sovereign level and there's no one else to kick it upstairs to and the upstairs is now we need physical goods we can't print those we can't print those so um that's why it's really the mother of all crises is because now that What do you want? We can get all of those things. We can get enough labor. We can get enough engineering. We can get all those things. We can get it really fast if we want. It's just the real value of bonds when we're done with it is going to be you're going to go from eating steak to eating hamburger to eating dog food. That's it. Or do you want to do that and let the Chinese make it all for you and dictate terms down the road? and that channel by which getting it done, building out AI, doing what needs to be done devalues the dollar and the treasury market. To be clear, which which channel is it through all these extremely well-c capitalized companies just paying top dollar for things and households and people don't get the copper and food? Instead, it's the AI

[00:40:51] data centers and electricity prices go up. Or is it that the government itself is investing and therefore the government runs a bigger deficit has greater borrowing needs and then treasury supply issuance goes up. So is it which channel is it or which one do you see as a bigger channel for dollar devaluation bond market devaluation or is there a third channel I missed? they're borrowing more already to invest in these companies, right? So, it's a little bit of, you know, sort of, you know, selling treasuries to buy rare earth. If the US government's doing that, why wouldn't everyone else do that, right? Or or what have you. Okay? So, there's a little bit of that, but that hasn't been done in size enough to really matter yet. When they're telling you we are going to set a floor price for these critical commodities, like that's that's that is one side of it. We've seen the sort of transmission mechanism through through through what you've highlighted which is higher electricity costs and higher copper etc. And that kind of goes through and you starve the consumer side. Again that's because on one hand it it is inflationary in the inputs but when

[00:41:52] you're starving the consumer side that's deflationary right. So those people have a lot of debt consumer debt etc in aggregate. And if if consumption goes down, it might be harder to service debt economywide, that's ultimately deflationary. I think that's the bet is hopefully we can do this. Now, you throw in the politics of it all. That's where it starts to get tricky. And in that's one area where it starts to get tricky. There was a I can't remember, it was like an energy commissioner election for two seats statewide in the state of Georgia in November, early November on election day. And for the first time since 2006, they went straight Democrat. And they both ran on higher energy costs, on higher electricity costs, and >> on lowering energy costs because AI is is causing the price of power to go up so much. >> Yeah. And and oh, by the way, we've seen articles since highlighting that the AI guys are spending a lot of money lobbying to basically take states rights away as it relates to AI, which is basically let us starve the people so that we can build our god in a box. It's

[00:42:54] not financial repression, but it's real resource repression. >> Real repression. And you know, you can do that, but the release valves are really two things. It's until something in the consumer loan market goes boom, right? Until you start having credit delinquencies at banks, and we know how the government relate, you know, and the Fed re, you know, react to that, you know, nothing can happen to the banks. Uh, and politically, right? So, we're already the most politically unstable in this country that we've been in my lifetime and probably in my parents lifetime. If you look at some sources like Peter Turchin um and that that is also you know how how does how does that you know you it pushes you more down the road of populism and the more populist you get generally speaking the more inflationary you get but that's a soft thing. The biggest thing is ultimately that capital flow dynamic which is we need high asset prices to maintain consumption, maintain tax receipts, to maintain the debt, but we also need the capital that's in the asset markets that does all those things to invest in all of these. there's a

[00:43:55] real capital shortage and ultimately the only way to address that is basically like I said the Fed can write a dollar swap line to the tune of the net international investment position so we can keep asset prices high and you know and we can and we can invest and you know that's the Fed's you know that would be a dollar swap line of 20 something trillion dollars and that's fine but that's where you get into the real inflation of this until then it's here and there but ultimately The what do you want? The what do you want decision in my view is ultimately like I said going to be they're going to sacrifice the dollar and the treasury market the real value of it in order to compete and reshore. I think they have to and that's where you get into the real inflationary side of it but we're not there yet. They're still trying to ride two horses with one rear end. And that that real uh that that that third channel Luke could be what we started a conversation with which is President Trump cajols foreign business leaders and investment titans such as in Japan, Saudi Arabia to invest

[00:44:57] so much money in these money losing private venture capitalbacked AI companies that that foreign investment dollar goes into those companies instead of into the treasury market. So that could be a force as well which you talked about. Yeah, that's that's exactly. And that gets back into the real cost of capital because now it's like, okay, well, if the ca the capital can go one or the other. It can't go both. And you know, I just saw something this today that I you know, they're forecasting $3 trillion of capital going into AI from in the US from 2025 to 2028. So, we're almost at the end of 25. But like that's a lot of capital to compete with Scott Besson who's got to sell a lot of bonds, especially if they take away his tariffs. But even if they don't take away his tariffs and anything that drives rates up drives his deficits up. So it's, you know, ultimately like the most simplistic way to look at it is you can buy yourself a lot of room by doing something really simple, which is shift all issuance to the front end, cut rates to zero. That's essentially money printing,

[00:45:59] right? That's a you know that cash is just a 0% yielding note of zero duration right and so if you're financing enormous deficits with 0% yielding T bills of three month duration actually the duration would be less than three months right it's the effective duration anyway that's a that's the kissing cousin of money printing financing straight money print and that would work you could do that the deficit would come down a ton because interest would be dimminimous um you know if you could find a sucker willing to hold that paper great enter stable coins. That's maybe I think part of Besson's plan. But the release valve is back to the dollar, right? Anyone who owns any dollar denominated debt. Like if you did that, the long end of the curve would go like this. Not like this, like that. And then they're going to have to come in and go, "Okay, $130 trillion bond market. A lot of us in dollars. Okay, here's the cut off. Like we're not letting it go above that. What do you want? real value of the

[00:46:59] dollar or real value of the bond market or reshort you you got to choose. So Luke, even though that scenario sounds like it could have some severe consequences on the Treasury market and dollar assets, dollar government bonds in the medium term, it sounds like in the short term, maybe 2026, 2027, that could be a recipe for giant bubble, giant asset price inflation, and a giant nominal boom in in at least trillions of dollars worth of data centers are being built. Nvidia's earnings per share, all these construction companies earnings per share, these grid buildout firms earnings per share just skyrocket to the moon. Is that the world you envision over the next year in 2026 and 2027? >> I think it'll be a tale of two cities, if you will. and 26. I think the first I don't know if it's the first quarter of 26, first half of 26 based on what we're seeing today until they come in and do the capping of the yields. However, they do that and there's a number of different ways they

[00:48:00] could. I think it's going to be a very volatile, ugly environment for pretty much everything except for gold and probably silver, but gold in particular and maybe the dollar. Maybe I think the dollar holds in fine. I don't think it's going to skyrocket, but I think it holds in fine. And I think everything else is like because like AI is trying to borrow a bunch of money. Scott Besson's trying to borrow a bunch of money. Japan bond yields are rising rapidly. Right? So you've got the two biggest carry trades in the world or the dollar carry trade and the yen carry trade. And rates on both real rates on both of them are going up. And there's some sort of IV liquidity drip if you will from the standing repo facility they're trying to address with it. know there's talk about SLR exemptions again, but those SLR exemptions, as I understand them, are more on the margin than they were in say April of 2020 when the deal was basically, hey, buy as many treasuries as you can on infinite leverage. Go knock yourselves out, right? When you exclude them entirely from capital or from your capital, your capital cost. And we're not seeing that

[00:49:02] yet. And to me, it's a next year's a tale of two cities. It is BC AD. The BC is like from now until whenever they whatever crisis comes because capital costs have gotten too high and then they cap them and then yeah, I think nominally, wow, you're I think you're going to it's it'd be the biggest nominal boom since World War II. And I think it's a world where particularly in the AD portion of that world, stocks go up in dollars a bunch and they go up more or they go down in gold, excuse me. In other words, in real terms, stocks go down, but in in dollar terms, they go up. That's and I don't if you said to me, look, when's the A, you know, when's year zero, right? When do we go from BC to AD? My base case right now is probably sometime in the second quarter, but that's very loosely held. The way things are going now, it could be February. Maybe if we maybe if some of these IV drip solutions buy us more time, maybe it's June, July, August. I don't feel very strongly on that, but I

[00:50:03] feel very strongly that I don't think we're going to make it through 26 without that sort of year zero liquidity, that decision, right? That what do you know what do you want? They're going to have to choose. And I think they're going to choose, all right, throw the real value of the bond market under the bus, throw the dollar under the bus, and let's go. And that's a really good thing for most Americans. It's not good for people that own a lot of long-term bonds on a real basis. It might be good nominally, right? They might you you could depending on where you set the ceiling. Look, 4% on a 10-year. Maybe they sit at three effectively. Maybe they sit at 2 and a half. That's great. Except gold's going to be 10 15,000. S&P is going to be freaking 12,000. Um, Bitcoin is probably be a lot higher. Although I think goes Bitcoin goes a lot lower first. >> I want to ask about why Bitcoin is going lower. But yeah, first gold and silver. So gold is up 60% over the past year. Silver's up 80% over the past year. Over the past three years, silver has effectively tripled. What's going on here? And why is so much money flooding

[00:51:04] into precious metals? >> The short answer is on gold, it's central bank buying. And it is the recognition it and gold that gold wins in inflation or deflation. And it's the only asset on the board that wins in inflation or deflation. Everything else loses in one or the other. And what I mean by that is in with debt to GDP at 120% in the US which is the reserve currency issuer. So that's why I focus on it. And with US true interest expense, even with record tariffs, even with record receipts, even with stocks at all-time highs, the US true interest expense is just gross interest plus entitlements plus veterans affairs, it's still 96% of trailing 12 months receipts. And so if you have deflation, you're going to push receipts below your debt and your interest and interestike obligations. And the US faces a choice. Default on treasuries or entitlements or print the money or do something that's

[00:52:05] functionally equivalent. And we know they're never going to do the first. So it's always a second. So deflation introduces sovereign credit risk around the world, including in the United States. Good for gold. Similarly, if inflation picks up, obviously good for gold. So, I think there's a growing number of investors that realize that. So, it's there's just a capital flow dynamic. There's a central bank side. Silver, I think, is you've seen a lot more electronic usage. You've seen China being a huge buyer. And I think those are really the drivers, you know, and then the monetary side. I think globally as well. I think that's been a driver. But I think those are the reasons why gold and silver have outperformed so much. You did you say $10,000 $15,000 gold? Tell us about just how bullish on gold you are under what time horizon. Everyone knows Luke loves gold, but just get a little more specific for us, please. >> Look, to me, the way gold, the only way gold loses is one of two things. Either the US stands aside and says, you know

[00:53:06] what, we're good. We're going to let China make all of our stuff for us and we're just going to preserve the real value of the bond market and we're going to we're going to be dependent on China for all of our military and all of our goods etc etc forever more and even that only buys them a little bit of time right because that introduces problem not too distant future for obvious reasons the other way gold loses is if Russia and China both have their leaders and entire political leadership replaced by their respective equivalents of Boris Yeltson who proceeds to sell off their country's assets for pennies on the dollar to Western interests. And I think there's zero chance of that happening. And so ultimately, if neither of those two things are going to happen, and I describe a very low probability, then pretty much all roads lead to gold, right? AI works awesome for gold because you're going to undermine the tax base of this country. 38 of the 50 states in the US biggest employer is healthcare

[00:54:09] and it's mostly administration. Unemployment in the US under 25 unemployment in the US with a bachelor's degree is already 7%. You take 7% unemployment in this country, kaboom, the whole thing blows up. Good for gold. So I think AI al I think gold wins if AI works. I think gold wins if AI doesn't work because as David Saxs said last week, we'd have a recession. Last recession deficits rise 600 to 800 base points of GDP. You're looking at 134% of GDP deficit. Easy. Fed's going to have to print money to finance it. Good for gold. You can see what has happened globally geopolitically, which is NATO essentially lost in Ukraine with China helping Russia. And ultimately, we know what Russia and China want. They want to change the system to a neutral reserve asset. They've been saying it for 16 years. They've been buying a lot of gold. I think that's good for gold. I think the US wants this. We want to reshore. We're ultimately going to reshore. I'm very optimistic. As Winston Churchill apocryphily said, the

[00:55:09] Americans always do the right thing after they've exhausted all the alternatives. The whole point of what do you want is we're out of alternatives. Do you want do you want to throw the dollar and the bond market under the bus on a real basis or do you want to be dependent on China? And we've made our choice. It's clear because it was a Trump decision. It was a Biden decision. It was a Trump dec like it's been through in through different administrations and back to the very first point that we let off with which was you can't use the Treasury bond as the world's reserve asset if the Americans are also going to be resuring. It's a double entry bookkeeping fundamental violation. It would be like throwing a ball up in the air and it not coming down. It's it would be a suspension of gravity. You need to use something else. And to the everybody's point, there's there's no other currency that's as good as or able to be used. They're right, except gold's the only thing there. This whole central bank's buying gold, I think it's going to keep happening. And right now,

[00:56:10] if you include gold and global FX reserves, it's 28% of total. The dollar's 46%. You get another 30% up in gold, maybe another thousand tons or two a year for a year or two, another two years. Gold's going to be the biggest reserve asset above the dollar. It's already bigger than US treasuries. Are we still on a dollar? Is the dollar still the reserve currency of the world if gold's bigger than dollars? Or is it gold again at a floating price? Currencies, which we've been calling for 11 years now. So, where could gold go? Where would I sell gold? asked a great question I think last time we talked or two times ago which is where would you be bullish on long-term treasuries and I answered it's not a question of where on a yield it's where on the dollar and where on the dollar relative to gold and what I said then and I still believe now is when you look historically US official gold at market value right now even with this huge run it's 12% of the foreign held portion of US debt US foreign held treasuries long-term

[00:57:12] average is 40% % 1989 when the Berlin Wall came down and our unipolar moment started it was 20%. So in an honest to goodness dollar crisis in 1980 by the way it was 130% 135%. So to me I think gold's got to go up at least 3x from here if not 4x and then I would start thinking about it maybe 5x then I would start thinking about it but some of it's going to depend on how successfully we do what we need to do over the next 5 to 10 years in terms of industrializing and reshoring. Look, there's just because America says we're going to put our mind to it doesn't mean it's going to go well. Um, it should. It should. Look, the South was darn sure they were going to beat us in the Civil War. And it didn't go well. And it would depend at that point. But I think for me, minimum, I think I think gold, even with this huge run, is still the cheapest asset on the board. It wins in inflation. It wins in deflation. And it is still it would still have to at least double to get back to its last to its level of 40 years ago. >> Yeah. So a 4x on gold would be over

[00:58:12] 16,000. A 5x would be over 20,000. Those are some pretty high numbers. Luke, I've reviewed the numbers, but you have the command of the granularity. So this is an interesting question. I don't think it's the case that the US has bought gold since a very long time, probably since like pre-world war, pre the 1950s. How is it that the US still nominally has the biggest gold reserves if all these other countries have been accumulating for so long? >> Well, maybe the easiest way to answer it is that the only number that China hawks believe out of China is China's gold reserves. The only number that Russia hawks believe out of Russia are Russia's gold reserves. Both of those numbers are complete. They're they're canards. Russia, China, I would bet a substantial amount of money. And this is not just me talking out of the side of my head. I've been told that China's gold holdings, there's the official gold holding and then but they also have other official

[00:59:13] >> state banks >> safe. Exactly. And those are not official reserves, but you and I both know push comes to shove. That's official gold. And my guess is that the Chinese probably have 50 to Yan Noyenheis has done a lot of really good work on that amongst others around and sorry Yan if I pronounced your name your last name wrong but the the the 14,000 16,000 tons they might be 60 to 100% more than what we have the Russians I think in an unofficial capacity they probably have more per capita and I don't know whether that's 4,000 tons 6,000 tons it could be more though but that's why I think ultimately we still have the most is China's still doing hide and buy as it relates to gold. Russia is too. >> And so when it comes to gold, it's not looking looking like the dollar, the US is backed all that that well relative to China, other countries maybe. But it does look good for oil. It wasn't looking good for oil in the 2000s. But over the past 10 years, our production of oil has exploded almost entirely. All

[01:00:13] more than 100% of the growth having come from Texas and shale oil and the Peran basin. That looks pretty good for us. Isn't that a good backing? And also, isn't President Trump a huge supporter of drill, baby drill? >> He says he is. He He I think he has been. And it has been a huge advantage. I think it has been something that I've been watching with great interest. And it's another one of these inconsistencies from this administration. They say they want drill, baby drill, and then you best say he wants to get oil down in price. Look, sub60 it doesn't really make sense for purely oil for purely or more let me put it for more shale oil wells for the oily wells versus gassy wells right there's an argument to be made by that that is made by Doomberg and I think it's a very valid argument of look you can in theory if you get gas prices up enough that you go from having oil be the main product

[01:01:13] and gas being the co-product that sort of gets given away or flared takes it near zero to a world where we use a lot more of our gas for AI and generation etc. And now you get gas to a break even on a BTU basis. He estimates it's five six bucks and I have no reason to doubt him. He's really good on that stuff. That all of a sudden you can turn oil into a co-roduct and now oil can go lower and volumes will not slough off. um maybe uh that that that's possible that we could go lower from here. But the fact is we haven't seen production really rise at all in oil over the last year and a half. And I would think that with oil having consolidated, shale production having consolidated to big well- capitalized multinational players, I don't think they would produce a lot more. Like I was at a dinner in January with a former Shale exec friend of mine, somebody else. They were saying, "Look, there was a major shale property for sale in the US in January this year and

[01:02:14] oil was 73." And the majors were looking at it and turning their nose up at it because they couldn't make the math work at 73. And so now we're whatever 59 60. I think as long as we keep oil in the 65 to we keep oil in the sort of 60 65 to 75 80 range, I think oil production can keep growing. I think it will stagnate and maybe even roll a bit if it gets too much cheaper from here. So it is absolutely still an asset but again when you go back to the ISM manufacturing from November we know AI is booming. We know everything related to electrical grids booming. So for ISM to print 47 or wherever we printed today I think new orders were like 44. There's not a lot happening. And over the last 15 years under shale, ISM and shale and the Baker Hughes ridge count have been very positively correlated. You know, maybe we're already seeing some signs of slowing activity in the shale patch. Dallas Fed survey would certainly suggest that's maybe the case on some level, if not quite yet. So, it's one of

[01:03:15] these things. Yes, dependent on price. My base case is they're going to keep they the powers of be are going to keep oil at a price level that keeps US shale production flat to rising slightly because I agree 100% that it is absolutely it's a support of the dollar. Right, >> Luke? As promised, I want to ask you about your bearish outlook on Bitcoin. You write in a note that Bitcoin is the last functioning smoke alarm and that Bitcoin's going to continue to get crushed in your view. Why is that the case with Bitcoin now down well over 30%. >> Yeah, so we went short-term negative short-term negative on on Bitcoin about three weeks ago in our work after being very positive for a very long time after owning it under 30,000 pretty much from late 22, early 23, the bulk of our position all the way up and hadn't really sold hadn't sold any that entire time. Really a function of a couple things. Number one, I had been expecting Bitcoin to separate from tech. I had

[01:04:18] been expecting Bitcoin has been trading like a tech stock, just a high beta tech stock, and I'd been expecting it to trade more like a neutral asset. And I was wrong. It is just continuing to trade that way. So then when I overlay that with what's happening in AI where I look and go, okay, up until about three months ago, yes, there's all this craziness happening in in AI and data center spending, but it was all sort of equity based, cash flow based, who cares? And then they started borrowing money and then they started doing creative financing and it's and then everyone's admitting that everyone knows that everyone knows that the constraint is grid, not semiconductors. GH Bitcoin is still a tech stock. That ain't good for tech. It ain't going to be good for Bitcoin. The next issue is this real capital cost issue we highlighted right which is Bessant Japan AI oil and gas they all need to spend a whole ton of capital at a time of relatively constrained balance sheet certainly relatively constrained relative to the the trillions of dollars a year that are going to be needed and so yes there's

[01:05:19] some marginal liquidity coming in standing repo blah blah blah blah as we put in the note and question that you got that we sent beforehand anything the amount of capital needed means that anything less than nuclear printing is tightening or in theor immortal words of Ricky Bobby Will Ferrell if you ain't first you're last it's a macro version of that so if real capital costs are rising if it's still a tech stock high beta tech stock and then the way it trades and the other thing that's troubled me is just that it hasn't broken out versus gold I've been watching this when you look at the 2014 cycle I think Bitcoin went to sorry the two Yeah, we went from 0.01 O of gold at the peak to point to 11 oz to 35 O to 36 ounces over the last however many cycles. And now it's rolling over hard against gold. And I don't know why that is, but then when I see things like Tether, which are

[01:06:20] synonymous with Bitcoin on some level, buying gold miners, hiring gold traders, when their gold position is bigger than their Bitcoin position on their balance sheet based on the attestation I saw this weekend, again, I don't know why, but I'm trying not to I just I need to respect what the markets are telling me. And when I see this breakdown of Bitcoin against dollars, against gold in light of what we were talking about, those were the straws that broke the camel's back. And then the last thing that was more recent was really this quantum computing question, which is everybody knows it. Everybody knows it's a risk and it has been forever. like Satoshi was talking about it being a risk someday, but in the last several months, quarters, you had very serious people raising the potential that it could be an issue within two to nine years. And the quantum stuff is way over my head. It's way over my pay grade. I try to read it and I feel like the dumbest

[01:07:20] person alive. And I am not in a position to sit here and have any debate with someone. Is quantum not is it a risk? Is it not? What I am in a position to discuss is I've been in markets 30 years and I'm watching the way Bitcoin is not making a new high against gold. I'm watching what Tether's doing. I'm watching what these people I respect in the space are saying and I'm saying markets are telling me that serious. And oh, by the way, the OG whales most selling in a cycle ever. >> Oh, really? >> Yeah. Maybe it's nothing. Maybe it's nothing. Now, intuitively, if I was worth 50, 100, 200, 300 billion dollars, billion dollars in Bitcoin, it's probably mostly in Bitcoin. I've held it for 15 years, 10 years. I would probably be very tied into that world. And I wouldn't sell unless there was some sort of real I would start to take some off the table if I thought quantum was a risk I wanted to at least hedge somewhat. And so when I see this whale selling, I can't help but think,

[01:08:22] you know, maybe there's something there given the price action I'm seeing when you're looking at gold versus Bitcoin not breaking setting a massive a new high against gold for the first time in its life. when I see it breaking down on a momentum bas various momentum bases relative to the dollar in on long-term charts like I don't really look at the chart like for me I just want to see the long-term technicals and the long-term technicals were really breaking down about three four weeks ago six weeks ago and so that's really where I just say you know what I'm I might be I fully concede I might be being too cute by half and these technicals when they broke each of the last three times as emphatically as they just broke about three weeks ago four weeks ago, the median decline in Bitcoin was 65 70% each time and there were there have only been three triggers in 14 years and there have been no false triggers. So for me it's you know what especially given the size that it had grown to in in my portfolio uh you know it was a champagne problem. Knock on wood it was I got something right for change but the

[01:09:22] it just to me it's it spoke to a need to rightsize it and substantially reduce positions because I just think it's going a lot lower. And I guess lastly to tie back wise functioning I've called it the last functioning smoke alarm for five, six, seven years. Look, it's telling us the first half of next year is going to be ugly, right? Let's make no mistakes. Bitcoin, if this Bitcoin selloff is not just 100% tech and quantum computing related and forget about tech because tech liquidity, too. If this isn't just a Bitcoin specific quantum computing selloff, and I don't think it is, then what Bitcoin's telling us is, you know, sir, we go back to that BC and AD of 2026. Yikes. There's a lot of basically everything but gold and the dollar are likely to get way late until we get to year zero is what Bitcoin Sam. >> And on what time horizon are you bearish Bitcoin? One month, three month or is this a multi-year negative view? You have >> probably a function of more price than time, but there's probably price and time. In other words, look, if I woke up and Bitcoin is 40,000 and a little bit of time has passed and

[01:10:25] there's revulsion and any number of technical indices, one of the nice things about having the size following I do on X is it's a very useful indicator of sentiment. I can just, you know, chum, you know, throw some chum in the water and and the response I get is pretty informative. And then it's also going to be a reevaluation of the fundamentals, right, of okay, where's price? probably some time and then okay is quantum getting closer better what have you amongst and again I'm not smart enough to figure out whether it is or not there's a a quorum of people I'm watching that are this is their lives I'm going to trust what they're having to say but that's for me really more it like I for me it's a for at least the next several months it's negative again if it crashed tomorrow to a level where it's okay I and revulsion I could revisit that but it's I don't think that's going to happen I I don't think it's going to happen that fast. Certainly not the way la the last three cycles have gone. And you know, I've lived through each of those. You know, 13 I own Bitcoin. 17 I own Bitcoin. 21 I own Bitcoin. And it was like same kind

[01:11:26] of thing. It felt very similar. The reaction was very similar. Um, you know, I had a tickler on my calendar literally in September like, "Hey, check Bitcoin. It's the fourth year." And I looked at it. It was like 120. I'm like, "Nah, we're fine." And so I finally only went negative at like 95,000. um you know better you know you know good good is better than you know sometimes you know good is better than than bad but it wasn't it wasn't perfect >> Luke I might add maybe I'm going too far you tell me but a key bull argument for Bitcoin is the federal governments not just in the US but around the world are out of control Bitcoin is the safe haven a lot of the Bitcoin that's been bought this year has been bought by Micro Strategy other Bitcoin holding companies who are issuing like five different types of preferred instruments and debt. I think there's a lot more financial engineering going on at Micro Strategy than there is at the US Treasury. >> It's a it's a fair point, right? And it's you're going to get me in trouble with the Bitcoiners. I got to tell you, I'm going to get hate mail, but um no, and it factors into it factored into my

[01:12:28] point, right? Because in any cycle, you've got some the cycle's done when the forced selling is done, right? And that is I don't know where that financial engineering is and I'm not the right person to talk about it. I I agree with you. It has occurred on some level. And so I just want to keep it really simple like I'm watching the technicals break down against gold against the dollar on momentum. It's not separating from being a tech stock. Um I'm and and critically we know yes the there's been a big marginal buyer from sort of treasury companies. there's been an element of financial engineering to it and real capital costs are rising and I am highly confident that um that ultimately you know like I said this ends with some version of extreme financial repression. It's the only way it can go unless we assume we're just going to let China run away with the game. And that level of financial repression needs

[01:13:29] um it it it needs the right pretext and we're nowhere near the right pretext yet. And so if I've got what I'm seeing in the markets, what I'm seeing in the sentiment, what I'm seeing how it's trading, the technicals, and how I got real capital costs rising, that's I think you rais a really important point. And I think that's partly why I think it's such a good indicator of why it's the last functioning smoke alarm, right? It's are still a relatively pure market. And so when it's doing what it's doing, the move index is probably quite a bit higher today, I would guess, but it's still relatively low. But that'll get to a number where all of a sudden we start waking up and like, "Oh my gosh, 10 year's up 15 basis points and the Dow's down 600 or the S&P is down 3%." That's what Bitcoin's telling us common. And then we revisit at that point, but it's Bitcoin's the first one with the financial engineering to hit it. And then >> and you said that bearish price action in Bitcoin is making you concerned about the stock market in 2026. Tell us about that, Luke. And also you've recommended a trade for your subscribers about

[01:14:31] basically long infrastructure short semiconductors and basically a long PAVE ETF and short the SOXX ETF. by, you know, I like that you didn't choose the VanX semiconductor ETF, which is a sponsor of mine, but tell us what's motivating that short because Luke, if the financing demands for data centers and everything is so extreme that the Federal Reserve, the government's going to get involved, it's going to weaken the Treasury market, weaken the dollar. In that world, I see a just a tremendous amount of money being spent with Nvidia and all the semiconductors. I understand the long pave thing but tell us about why you're short semiconductors which is you know kind of been powering this bull market this year and last year and also your views that about your bearishness on the overall US equity market. It's more a, you know, sort of a shorter term sort of way to get it's, you know, in a BC year zero AD world, you know, it's a way I think to lose less money or maybe even make a little money in a BC in the

[01:15:33] BC regime, however long that lasts. And that could be the next month, that could be three months. I don't think it's going to be longer than six months where ultimately the infra the grids the grid's the bottleneck and there's and the chips are the surplus. It isn't. You're It's possible. You're It's entirely possible. You're right. That depending on the sequencing of events that Yeah. If they come in and do the big print sooner than we think, which is entirely possible, then so they both could do well, right? They both could do well. And actually being short the one you could end up upside down. So if you say, "Hey, where would you want to be short socks over the next 12 months?" Probably not. Over the next two, three months, would I want to be short socks against PA? Yeah. in that BC world again if I have to be short something especially I generally and I've told subscribers this not in that particular note but in a world where the most powerful country in the world the reserve currency issuer needs negative real rates for like the foreseeable future just to avoid a

[01:16:36] fiscal crisis like shorting assets is a very difficult game right because when the tornadoes blowing even the turkeys fly so um it's it's not sort of a secular, hey, I want to be long pave and short socks for the next ye, two years, even year. It's, hey, real capital costs are rising. Things are looking iffy. And when you get things I got an inbound about five weeks ago from a friend of mine who goes, "Hey, I got the weirdest call. This is a guy who we've known each other 15 years. He used to run research at a at a very important institution." And he goes, "I got to call. He's in the data business now. He I got a call going, "Hey, we got extra chips. You need any." And he he goes, "I'm not in that business. So if they're calling me, like I'm not the first call." And that was then followed by Sataya saying, "I got all the chips I need. I don't have grit." And then you had, you know, sort of all these other So it's really much more about sort of the BC world, if you

[01:17:37] will, of all right, rising capital cost, blah, blah, blah. They're not going to stop working on grid. And so it's entirely possible that yeah, if you have an asset rerating down, could PAVE go down? Sure. But I just think it's going to go down less in that world than stocks will because it's the constraint versus versus chips for the moment. >> That makes sense. Thank you, Luke. And so you're concerned about inflation and the rising cost of capitals about just all this money in going to invest in AI and particular the grid. There's an inflationary story of AI. You've explained it over over the past um hour or so. What about the deflationary story that AI is going to make things so much more productive and either there's going to be fewer workers which is going to be a giant economic problem or there's going to be same amount of workers but they just can do way more either both of which are disinflationary and also the timing between the inflation and the deflation. It's that timing issue that I think is the like the critical thing. And as someone in the rust belt, my working mental model of what AI is going

[01:18:38] to do is what China did, right? At China, China going into the WTO was just AI 1.0. It was a massive productivity boom, lowered costs, let companies do more with less. And that was ultimately managed by, you know, let's talk through what happened. China goes into the WTO 01 from 01 to08 manufacturing jobs in the United States fall 35%. Those are initially papered over by what I have called it private UBI universal basic income where the big too big to fail banks start giving loans to anything that can fog a glass. They take credit standards down to basically nothing. And that means that even though you Mr. UAW worker who was making a no one 30 bucks an hour full benefits lost his job he's now a Walmart greeter for 12 bucks an hour no benefits but Goldman will give him a subprime loan and so he can still get his bass boat he can still go to the ball game have season tickets

[01:19:39] his standard of living doesn't fall much and that's all fine as long as the home equity lines that are all running on these subprime home equity lines etc as long as home prices rise every year that whole situation works until home prices roll over and then the home equity lines roll off and the whole house cards comes unhinged and ends up on the Fed's balance sheet, right? And the Fed's balance sheet goes from 800 billion to five 4.6 trillion and from 09 to 09 to 14. Same dynamic here. AI I think is we're already seeing the early signs, right? It's unemployment amongst 20 24 year old bachelor degree holders 7%. Uh you're seeing company, you know, Amazon came out and said there's 160,000 people over the next few years that we were going to hire, we're not going to hire. There's gonna be a lot of that. And so you get into where's the UBI going to come from. You can make a case that some of the buy now pay later and the private credit and the non-traditional sources of credit have been that we're now seeing smoke if not early fires. Some of

[01:20:41] the markdowns in some of these books. We've got Wall Street doing the Wall Street thing trying to hey 401ks we've got this private credit. You should get involved. This is the best deal ever. trying to offload it on the public, which I think is it is what it is. It's it's what Wall Street does. So, you like we're early in that process of the home prices peaking. And then on the downside of that and through it all, look, from 08 to 2022, a million Americans died of drug overdoses. Case in Deon did really important work, uh, two professors, um, you can read it in Wall Street Journal 2015. You can read it again, I think, in 18 or 20. But when you add up the drug overdose, suicides, and death by alcoholism, particularly among middle-aged white men that were at the center of AI productivity miracle 1.0, the guys that lost their manufacturing jobs, their death rates were rivaling what happened to Soviet Russian men posts Soviet Union in the 1990s in terms of early death, suicide, alcoholism, etc. I my view of AI is that it's going

[01:21:43] to be fairly similar and and you know I've talked about this a few times publicly and you can kind of tell I'm a little bit it makes me sad. It makes me sad. Um and I think it's already starting. We had I have a friend that that owns a funeral home and recently in one day they had six suicides and that was just one day and we really haven't even gotten into the job losses yet and they're coming and and that's just this is just human toll. If we're already having a problem in the sort of private UBI, I wouldn't I have not seen anything where we've seen a decline in credit. We've not seen like the credit cut off yet, but we've seen some sort of smoke that we could see clear to credit cut off sometime in the first half of next year. Maybe we'll see in these private credit markets that have been private UBI, then you're going to start to have consumer credit losses rise a lot. And if AI does even close to what it says it's do through 2026, you're going to see rising delinquencies

[01:22:43] on houses, cars, credit cards, etc. And that's clearly deflationary. Uh until the banks have to until somebody cries uncle, right? And there's a crisis and then the Fed we know will step in because they always step in to save the banks and that's fine. That's their what they're there to do. Um and I think that'll that'll then be inflationary off a lower level. The thing that is different in this cycle versus the '08 cycle of this playing out is policymakers saw fit to regulate the US banking system into holding as their liquid capital US treasuries. And so what what I'm talking about here looks a lot like 08 right up to this point which is okay you start to have these credit delinquencies now banks are going to join number one jobs are going to fall deficits are going to increase credit

[01:23:45] delinquencies are going to go up if deficits go up treasury is going to go up to finance the deficits banks start to have credit losses they're going to start at some point to sell treasuries to finance credit losses at least that's what we're told right we started to see it in the signature bank and SIBB, we had that mismatch problem that they could have sold treasuries, but they didn't want to because they were so far underwater. And so we had sort of, you know, BTFP was was just yield curve control for the banks um to get them liquid on their treasury positions. And you'd have that same kind of issue again. >> So the deflationary pressures, you see a lot of them, but you think ultimately that will turn into inflation again because of government stimulus. Even in a world where AI has automated so much knowledge work, you still see that as inflationary. Yeah, because ultimately AI automating so much information work means AI creating massive amounts of mortgage delinquencies and car loan delinquencies etc. Because look, white collar people

[01:24:46] have no idea what's coming for them. Like the one of the one of the nice things about being in the rust belt is like you have a lot more sort of blueco collar friends that got eaten by this shark, the 1.0 shark of productivity miracle. White collar people have no idea. And when it comes for them, they know what they're going to do, right? They're going to do what the blue collar guys did, which is stay up on the car longer than on the house because they're not going to take the h, you know, the same kind of stuff. And that's absolutely deflationary in the short run. Absolutely. But I think there's enough people like myself that are going to go, listen, I don't know when this thing really hits a critical tipping point. But once it does, banks are sellers of Treasury. There's not going to be a, you know, deficits are going to be increasing. Treasury supply. Banks are going to be increasing treasury supply. Oh, by the way, the dollar probably go up in this, which means foreigners are going to be selling treasuries as well. Deflation with leverage where it is across the system tells you like ugly things. And that's why I think next year is going to be sort of BC year zero AD with year zero being the big print. And

[01:25:49] I think it's what Bitcoin is hinting at, which is >> do you see the the inflationary pressures of all the AI capex that you've talked about, do you see that happening before the dis disinflationary things or do you think that the deflation could happen as early as next year? Just want to be clear with the timing. >> Gotcha. Gotcha. Um, it inflation probably stays in the near term relatively tame because you're going to have really high inflation on the on the production capex side because of the shortages that we described. >> Okay, that makes sense. So, it's not higher inflation that's a threat to the bond market. It's other things. >> Oh, yeah. No, the issue the threat to the bond market is inflation or deflation. That's what either way there's this very narrow and increasingly shrinking window because again the higher the debt goes the less deflation. Higher the debt goes and because you've regulated the bond market to being the capital of all these leverage institutions that when they start to suffer deflationary losses they have to sell rather than buy treasuries.

[01:26:50] You end up with you end up with a shrinking small and shrinking window of inflation is bad for the bond market. Deflation is bad for the bond market. >> Ex explain that. So banks are levered and own a lot of treasuries and when there's deflation, there's credit losses. So they have huge losses on the credit side, but they generally interest rates go down. So that helps them and it increases demand for treasuries. A newer player, you've covered this well, I know in your research, is the hedge funds very levered as well. What why would deflation cause people cause those leverage players to be a seller of treasuries rather than a buyer like it has been normally? Just because deflation increases volatility. You increase volatility on the hedge fund basis trade, right? They've bought almost 40% of long-term issuance since 2022 per the Fed, that white paper about a month ago, right? So they're long a trillion eight in treasuries funded in repo and highly levered. And so if V goes up anywhere, equities, treasuries, geopolitically,

[01:27:51] they're going to degross like there there's just no question. They are going to be big sellers of cash treasuries. So that's upward pressure. That's one upward pressure factor. The other factor is, you know, in as as you get deflation, the world's short dollars, right? They've borrowed a bunch of dollar on one side of their balance sheet. The world's short dollars, right? They have borrowed a bunch of dollar debt. They are, as the dollar goes up, it makes those obligations tougher to repay. They need to sell dollar assets to maintain or sustain that debt. What do they sell? They own $8.5 trillion in treasuries. foreigners in aggregate maybe n trillion largely against what 13 trillion in dollar denominated debt. So as dollar debt goes up the $13 trillion denominated debt gets more ownorous you sell dollar assets in order to pay off that debt what do you sell you sell treasuries because you can so now you've got a hu 1.8 8 trillion in selling power from hedge funds and they'll be the first to go because that's just 2 p.m. risk manager comes in says degross now.

[01:28:51] Then on a bit of a lag, you're going to get a stronger dollar driving foreigners selling to defend currencies. Just a slight lag. Then deflation in a highly leveraged system is going to increase credit risks. Increased credit risks are going to lead to degrossing at banks. They own 4 trillion in treasuries agencies. I don't know who the buyer is other than the Fed. Right. So, I think you would I think and we've seen this and people still don't fully believe it. They've seen it five times now. 2020, 2022, early 23, late 23, 2024, and earlier this year, you've seen it. Okay. Six times. You've seen six times. Risk off. 10ear yield initially goes down. This is aha. Look at the Bitcoiners. Look, ah, they're losing money. Blah blah. And all of a sudden, 10ear yield stops going down. starts going up very rapidly as stocks continue going down and Bitcoin keeps going down. Now, nobody's laughing because this is the death spiral trade. Rates up, stocks down, etc. And then some version of liquidity comes in,

[01:29:53] whether it's jaw boning or BTFP or not QE or rate cuts or however they do it. They've done it any number of ways. Moving to the front end, we've seen it six times and people still don't believe it's going to happen the next time. I I would bet my house it's going to happen again. 10 year treasury down a little bit in yield and risk off five days, 10 days, maybe 15 days of trading days maybe if we're lucky and then it's going to take off higher like a scalded cat because it's just mechanics. It's just double entry bookkeeping. >> So what you think is going to happen again, what you bet your house is going to happen again is that the bond market is no longer the safe haven. It is for a few days, but ultimately when there's a panic on risk assets such as stocks, Bitcoin, everything that bonds are also a risk asset. >> Absolutely. effectively. Yeah, >> we'll leave it there. Luke, thanks so much for coming on Monetary Matters. Really appreciate it. People can find you on Twitter at Luke Groman and your website is fftft-lc.com. Thank you everyone for watching. Please leave a rating and review for Monetary Matters on Apple Podcast and Spotify and

[01:30:55] subscribe to the Monetary Matters YouTube channel. Thanks for watching. Remember to click the link in the description to learn more about the Tukrium Agricultural Fund benchmark index. Until next time. Thank you. Just close the door.
