[00:00:00] So, welcome back to Where Do I Start? We are now in episode number eight. My name is Jim Schultz, and I will continue to be your tour guide for the duration of this series. Man, we've covered a lot of ground to this point. We went all the way back to, you know, how do you make money with options? You know, making money with stocks versus options, and then getting into option pricing, getting into money-ness, which is what we covered in the previous episode. Now, we're going to start to kind of move into the analysis phase of what it is that we're trying to accomplish as options some of the metrics and other variables that we use to do our analysis on a daily basis are going to be the option Greeks. And so, here in episode number eight, we are going to build a foundation for, without question, the number one Greek that we use every single day, option delta. So, one of the reasons that we use delta more than any other Greek is because its versatility is unmatched. I mean, with all the Greeks, there's typically more than one way that you can look at the Greek. There's typically more than one way that you can use or apply that Greek. But,

[00:01:02] man, delta stands alone when it comes to the flexibility, the versatility, the interpretation that you can apply with this one singular Greek to your positions and inside your portfolio. So, when it comes to delta, there are effectively three different ways that we use delta on a daily basis. Number one, delta measures the option price move. So, what it shows you is, what is the expected option price move for a $1 move in the underlying stock. Now, remember, there's all kinds of things happening in the marketplace every single day. I mean, there's, you know, prices are moving, volatility is changing, time is going by. There's all kinds of different confounding factors that are happening on any given day or any given Sunday for my Willie Beamen fans that might be watching the show today. But, when it comes to just looking at delta itself, it is going to show you when the underlying stock price moves, how is the option price in my position anticipated to move? That is the first way, that is

[00:02:02] kind of the textbook way. We're going to talk more about that here in just a couple of minutes. Number two, it is a probability estimate. So, it also gives you an approximation of what is the probability that this option, this specific strike, actually finishes in the money. That's incredibly useful, especially on trade entry, which we will talk about here in a second as well. And then lastly, it is going to give you the share equivalent for that position. And so, as your position is entered, as it moves around, all the way up until you finally close the position, it's very helpful to know, okay, what is the actual size of this position? Like, how many equivalent shares of that underlying stock am I holding? Because it's not static. It's going to change, it's going to move around. Delta is going to give you that information. Okay, so let's dive a bit deeper into the option price move aspect of Delta. This is the classical, this is the textbook definition of Delta. I know that from first-hand experience because

[00:03:03] back when I was a finance professor, this was in the textbooks. This was in the textbooks that I ordered. This was in the textbooks that I taught from. Like, we looked at Delta, and this was typically the only way that we looked at Delta, which is really interesting, and I'll come back to that here in just a couple of minutes, but this is the classic way, the textbook definition of how Delta is described and explained and kind of understood in a lot of ways. How is the option price going to move when the underlying stock moves? So, case in point, let's say you have a Delta of 30, which a Delta of 30 is also often presented, which we'll see here in a minute, inside of tastytrade, as .30 on the option chain. But, when we're talking about Delta and referencing Delta, we would typically use the whole number version of that. It's kind of like a percentage. Like, when you have 30%, you don't typically say .30. That is correct, of course, if you're talking about the decimal form, but just in common parlance, that's not what people typically say. Think of Delta the exact same way. So, the Delta is 30. That means if there's a $1 stock move, the

[00:04:03] option price is anticipated to move by 30 cents. Don't worry about whether it's going up or down right now. Just get kind of the absolute value locked down. If the Delta is 50, now a $1 stock move is going to lead to a 50 cent option move. And then lastly, let's say the Delta is 65. And let's say the underlying stock moves by $2 now, just to kind of keep you guys on your toes. What is the expected option price move now? Well, it's going to be a $1.30 because it's 65 cents per $1 move, but this was a $2 move, so that's going to be a $1.30. And next up, you can use Delta as a probability gauge, as a probability approximation because it is going to show you what is the probability that that specific strike that I'm looking at for the strategy that's in question. What's the probability that that strike expires in the money? Like gets in the money and stays in the money. That is what Delta is going to show you. This is obviously incredibly helpful when you're screening for different strategies, when you're at trade entry, when you're trying to figure out and select your

[00:05:04] strikes for whatever strategy might you might be deploying. This can be incredibly useful at the trade entry point. At other points in time, too, over the life of the position, but I would say at trade entry, this is when this aspect and this angle or interpretation of Delta, we're going to use it the most as a probability approximation. So, using the same Deltas that we had on the previous slide. If the Delta is 30, that tells me that that strike has a 30% chance of expiring in the money. Pretty simple, pretty straightforward. If the Delta is 50, that tells me that that strike has a 50% chance of expiring in the money. And then of course, if the Delta is 65, that tells me that that strike has a 65% chance of expiring in the money. And then lastly, you can use Delta as a share equivalent. And so, using the same Deltas that we've used for the previous two interpretations of Delta, let's kind of stick with the same theme here and dance with who brung us. I've got a Delta of 30. That tells me that the position's going to feel like 30 shares of stock in that underlying

[00:06:04] instrument. So, whether it's Microsoft or Apple or Nvidia, whatever it might be, that is what the Delta's going to show you. Now, remember, Delta's fluid. It's dynamic. It's not going to stay the same. It's going to move on. It's going to change. It's going to kind of, you know, go up and go down as the market goes up, goes down, goes sideways, what have you. But, right now, in this moment in time, in real time, as a snapshot of my position size as measured by shares, Delta is going to tell you how big that position size is as measured by shares in the underlying stock. Delta of 30 feels like 30 shares. Delta of 50 feels like 50 shares. Delta of 65 feels like 65 shares. Delta of eight feels like eight shares. Delta of 88 feels like 88 shares. Okay, so hopefully that gives you somewhat of a foundation for understanding option Delta basics. Let's now hop into tastytrade and let's look at all three of these interpretations in the real markets with real prices and real stocks. Okay, so I'm inside of tastytrade and I've got Apple pulled up

[00:07:06] here for the purposes of our example. This is a great stock to use for this illustration. Let's just open up the July cycle and I'll probably just live in the July cycle for the purposes of what we're trying to understand here. Okay, so number one, the option price move. So, if I look at a given strike, so for example, let's take a look at this 290 put strike. So, I've got the 290 put right here that's selling for about $3.15. And you can see that the Delta on this guy is 21. So, what that means is, right now, the price of this 290 strike put in Apple is about let's just call it 315 just to make it simple. The delta on this position is about 20. It's 21 obviously, but let's use rounder numbers to make this even simpler. If the delta is 20, what that's telling me is if I put this put on, buy it or sell it, don't worry about that just right now. If I put this put on, if I put on a position with this put, as Apple's price

[00:08:06] up here moves around by a dollar, right? Right now it's about 310. It goes up to 311. It goes down to 309. It goes up to 312. It goes down to 308. For every dollar change in Apple, I can expect this option price to move by about 20 cents. And so as this option price moves around because the stock price moves around, I can expect it to move in approximately 20 cent increments. Now, this delta is dynamic, right? This delta is not going to stay fixed at 20 over the life of this position for the next 44 days. The delta's going to go up. The delta's going to go down based on a number of different market factors that we're not going to get into right now because we're just trying to build up this foundation of understanding option delta with option price moves relative to the underlying stock price movements. And similarly, if I go down to the call side, let me go to this 325 call. We'll leave our puts up there just for the purposes of comparison. If I do this 325 call, it's selling for

[00:09:08] about $5. It looks like a little bit less than $5 on the mid price, but that's fine. You can see the delta here is about 30 or exactly 30 actually. So that tells me that for every $1 move in Apple, I can expect this option price to move by 30 cents. So again, very similar or even exactly the same as what we saw on the put side, but it's similar from the standpoint of now we're talking about calls. We're not talking about puts. So now we're on the other side of the market so to speak looking at the call options, but the same basic principles apply. Okay, now lastly, how do I know if the option price is going to go up or down? Like how do I know when the stock moves and the delta shows me how the option price is going to move, how do I know which direction the option price is going to indeed move? Well, it depends on which side of the market you're on. It depends on whether you bought that put or you sold that put. It depends on whether you bought that call or you sold that call. That's not going to change how the option price moves, but that's going to change what

[00:10:08] it means for you and your P&L. Case in point, if I buy this put, if I'm long this put and Apple goes up, that's bad for me. That's going to be bad for me because I want Apple to go down because I'm long a put. Remember, that's a bearish position. And so then I can kind of, through deductive reasoning, kind of back my way into understanding that, okay, if Apple goes up, then that means that this put price is going to go down. That works against me if I bought that put, it works for me if I sold that put. And so again, Apple goes up in price, the put prices are going to go down. How much are they going to go down by? They're going to go down by 20 cents per $1 move. And again, whether or not that helps you or hurts you depends on which side of the market you're on. And of course, if Apple goes down, the put prices are going to go up and they're going to go up by 20 cents on the dollar with each move. Again, assuming delta remains relatively static for at least a little while, which generally speaking it does. Uh it does change and move, as

[00:11:10] we said, but you know, for the purposes of just an an hour or a couple dollars of stock price movement either way, it's going to be pretty reliable. And similarly on the call side, it's very intuitive to think in terms of, okay, which side of the market am I on? Long call, short call? What do I want the stock to do and then kind of deductively back into what that means for the option price. Case in point, if I buy this call option, I'm bullish. I want Apple to go up. If I buy this call option, I want the option price to go up. Right? When you buy an option, you want the price to go up. When you sell an option, you want the price to go down. So, if I buy this call option and Apple goes up in price, then I can deductively reason that it's going to go up by 30 cents on the dollar with Apple's underlying stock move. And if I bought the call, that's good for me. If I sold the call, that's bad for me. Okay, so hopefully looking at option price moves with underlying stock moves is making even more sense to you now that we pulled up this example with

[00:12:10] Apple. And of course, I would work through more examples on your own. Pull up Amazon. Pull up AMD. Pull up Micron. Pull up whatever and try to see if you can figure out how the option price is going to move when the stock moves and which direction it's going to go. And again, use your long calls and your long long puts and your short calls and your short puts to kind of reason through that. Now, let's look at probabilities. So, if I again, just take a couple strikes at random here. If I look at this uh this 330 call. So, let's look at a 330 call and let's also look at a 275 put. So again, remember looking at the deltas, which by the way, you can see they are represented in decimal form. That's again because it is on a per share basis. So, think about that as a decimal. We typically communicate about that similar to a percentage. 0.24 is 24. 0.10 is 10 and so on and so forth. You might also notice that the deltas on the put side are negative and the deltas on the call side are positive. That does not mean that every put that you put on

[00:13:12] is going to have negative delta. Depends on whether you bought it or sold it. And it does not mean that every call that you put on is going to have positive delta. It depends on whether you bought it or sold it. The reason why the calls are positive and the puts are negative is because option Greeks, just as a standard rule, at least on tastytrade, I think on most other brokers, too, if I'm not mistaken, they are presented from the vantage point of the long side of the contract. So, if I buy a put, the deltas are negative. If I buy a call, the deltas are positive. And so, that's why you see them presented in this way. But again, just using the absolute values to understand probabilities, I've got about a 10% chance that this 275 put finishes in the money. Well, that kind of makes intuitive sense, or hopefully makes intuitive sense to you, because Apple right now is at 309. In order for this to finish in the money, Apple would have to go down below 275 in the next 44 days. Now, is that impossible? No, that's not impossible. In fact, I mean, the option Greek itself is telling me there's about a 10% chance that it happens. There's about a 10%

[00:14:13] chance that Apple goes down to 275 and stays down there. Similarly, on the call side, I've got about a 24% chance that Apple goes up to 330 and stays there. It should make intuitive sense to you as well that the 330 strike has a much higher probability than the 275 strike on the put side because the hurdle that Apple has to jump over to get to that 330 call strike is much, much lower than the hurdle that Apple would have to jump over to get all the way down to the 275 strike. And so, when I'm looking at a 275, I've got a 10% chance. When I'm looking at a 330, I've got a 24% chance. Also, notice as you get closer to the at-the-money strike, which is effectively right here, notice what happens to the probabilities as we move in that direction. They get higher and higher and higher. That makes perfect sense, because again, you have a lower hurdle to jump over to actually achieve that objective of the stock going down to that level and staying at that level. Similarly, if you go in this direction with the call strikes, same principle, the probabilities are going to increase.

[00:15:15] And when you look at the at-the-money strikes, you see there's about a 50/50 proposition of a that the stock actually that that strike moves in the money. That should also make sense to you cuz from where the stock is now, it's effectively a 50/50 shot that it moves in the money from where it is right now. So, that's why the 310 strike on both sides is actually exactly 50 on the put side and the call side because Apple is right there. It's right up against the 310 uh, price point right now. And so, the probability that it actually jumps over that hurdle on either side of the market call or put is about a 50 50 shot. And then lastly, notice that the in-the-money strikes are all greater than 50 in terms of their probabilities. That makes sense because they're already in the money. So, the likelihood that they stay there is obviously going to be greater than 50/50 because they don't need the stock to do anything other than what it's currently doing. And so, when you look at in-the-money options, again, kind of piggybacking off of what we learned with moneyness, you can expect probabilities

[00:16:15] to be greater than 50% when you look at out-of-the-money options, like the first couple we looked at, the 275 put, the 330 call, you can expect those probabilities to be less than 50% and then when you're looking at that at-the-money strike, you can expect a 50/50 probability. And lastly, the share equivalent. So, again, just taking a couple strikes at random here. If I look at a 290 strike, actually, I think we've already looked at a 290 strike. Let's pick something else. If I look at a 300 strike put, if I were to put on a position in that put, that tells me that that position right now is going to feel like about 34 shares in Apple. Now, remember, every option contract is worth 100 shares of stock. And so, this 34 share equivalent now is obviously not static because again, it could be worth 100 shares at some point. It could go fully in the money and you have the full weight of that contract that you have to absorb. But right now, because the strike is out of the money, it's always going to feel

[00:17:17] like less than half of its full weight. Again, piggybacking off of the probabilities that we just learned about, when the option is out of the money, it's always going to feel like less than 50 shares. When the option is in the money, so it would be like the 325 put or the 335 put, that's always going to feel like more than half the weight of the full contract. So, 74 shares and 86 shares. And so, when you think about what does the contract feel like right now in terms of its size and its share equivalent, the deltas can tell you that. And the same thing on the call side. If I look at an out of the money call like this 315 strike, that only feels like about 43 shares right now. But, if I look at a 255 strike, a pretty deep in the money contract, that's going to feel like almost its full weight of 91 shares out of the possible 100. And then lastly, the final thing I want to say, as time goes by, out of the money deltas go out of the money deltas get smaller, just naturally.

[00:18:18] In the money deltas get larger, just naturally. And so, as time goes by, you know, we've got 44 days to go right now, but this is kind of like a an intermediate concept when it comes to delta, but still really helpful and kind of the next step in your learning when it comes to all of this. As time simply passes, out of the money deltas shrink. In the money deltas grow. And so, one way to interpret that within the context of what we're talking about right here is the share equivalent of your position will be dynamically changing. And it will be dynamically changing in a predictable way relative to time passing. If time is going by and I'm holding an out of the money option, a call or a put, it doesn't matter, the deltas on that position will be shrinking. So, my share exposure on that position will be shrinking. Conversely, if I'm in the money, I have an in the money call or an in the money put and time is just going by, my share equivalent on that position will be growing. My share equivalent on that specific

[00:19:18] position will indeed be moving higher. And so, that's an important thing to understand with delta and how it changes with time. All right, so now we've got a solid foundation for the delta basics. Now, a couple of things before I just cut you guys loose into the forest. Number one, this is only the beginning for delta. Much like all the other Greeks and much like all the other metrics in the marketplace. I mean, you learn the basics, you even go a couple steps, you know, further down the pathway into the forest. You learn a couple intermediate things. You realize, man, there's so much more to learn when it comes to this. There are so many more things to understand when it comes to this. Delta is no different. Theta is no different, which is where we're going to go next with next week's episode. Gamma is no different. Vega is no different. They're all going to be the same. I mean, this is a lifetime of learning when it comes to all the different things that are happening in the marketplace. But, this is a pretty solid foundation. But, then number two, I mentioned earlier about how as traders, we don't typically use the option price move that often in terms of how we actually, you know, use delta and interpret delta and apply delta every single day. That's 100% true. Of these three methods, I would

[00:20:19] say we probably use the probability estimator and the share equivalent a lot more than the actual option price move. And which one we use more, the probability estimate or the share equivalent? It kind of depends on at what stage you are in on the position or in the position's life. On trade entry, we're using the probability estimate all the time. But, over the life of the position, and we want to know how big is this position? How exposed am I to directional moves? We're probably using the share equivalent a lot more. And so, we actually, ironically, don't use the thing that's being taught in classrooms across America, across the world as actual traders. And so, we got to make a change, man. We got to make a difference. I don't know exactly how we're going to do that since I'm not in academia anymore, but hopefully we can figure it [music] out. But, either way, we've got a nice little delta foundation, and I'll see you guys next time. >> 10.
