[00:00:00] Hey everyone and thanks for dropping back into the macroverse. Today we are going to visualize the business cycle. If you guys like the content, make sure you subscribe to the channel. Give the video a thumbs up and check out benjamancow.com if you have any inquiries, if you want to reach out, or if you want to read the recent report that we published about a week ago now, the macro risk memo, which I think does a pretty good job of outlining my thoughts on where we are in the business cycle. Okay. But in this video, I want to go through through a thoughtful exercise on how we can better visualize them. The reality is that a lot of millennials like myself um haven't really experienced a full business cycle. If you were born in the '9s, which I

[00:01:02] was, if you were born in the '9s, then you haven't really been an adult when the business cycle when the last major business cycle played out. Now, just because we haven't really seen one, yes, there was the pandemic, but that's not really the same thing. Just because we haven't seen it, doesn't mean it won't ever happen. So, what I want to do is try to better visualize them. Now, one of the really interesting things is just when you look at the S&P 500 and we're looking at monthly candles going all the way back to the 1870s, what do you notice? One of the things we could argue is that a lot of business cycles end with a recession. The hard part, the tricky part, the part that so many people get wrong is predicting when

[00:02:02] that will actually end because the reality is no one really knows. It used to be more common for recessions to occur. The green shaded regions on this chart are representative of recessions in the United States. You can see back in the 1880s and 1890s, basically just the 1800s, recessions were really common, you know, to to to pretend like they could never happen would have seen would have been so far-fetched that I imagine the idea of pretending like they never happen would just been completely dismissed because you can see they happened very very frequently. When you look at this chart, it kind of makes you realize how if you always assume that patterns repeat themselves, how so many people before us would have gotten wrecked looking at some of these charts. I want to give you an example. Look at this period over here in the, you know, in the um 1900s when the

[00:03:03] market was just going sideways and then we had a big move up and then there was this drop. Now imagine in the '60s where we saw something similar, right? Where we were just going sideways for a long time into the 70s going into the late7s and then 80s and then we got a big move up and then we got a drop. Now you could argue that a lot of people after this drop in 1987 might have said, "Oh, what if that's the same thing as this drop before we just go lower?" After all, there's a lot of similarities, right? You go sideways for a long time, you go up and then you crash. Sideways for a long time, you go up and then you crash. But wait, the market continue to go up. So, you can't really look at prior patterns and then assume they have to play out. Now, with Bitcoin, for whatever reason, it tends to respect four-year cycle, as we've talked about many times, but the S&P has respected it as well uh many, many

[00:04:04] times. But when you look at the way this has gone, recession recessions used to be a lot more frequent back over in the 1800s and going into the early 1900s, but then you can see they started to become less and less common, right? They're just not nearly as common um through the the 40s and the 50s. They became something that still occurred, but not nearly as frequently. back over here, they were occurring basically every two to three years, it seems. Once we got into the 40s, it it you know, it spread out to maybe like 3 to 5 years on average. And then once we got to the 60s, you can see it took almost a decade. And we had we had several in a row back over here in the 70s and early 80s. But then after that a lot of things changed because then we went from 82 to 90 to 90 eight years and then we went

[00:05:06] from 91 all the way into 2001 so 10 years and then from 2001 to 2008 so 7. Now from 2009 to 2020 11 years but look how short-lived that was. Now, the argument for why it was so short-lived was because we just simply turned the money printers on. Now, this is not the best visualization. So, what I want to do is show a formula that I think does a pretty good job of helping us better visualize the business cycle. Now, I have done a video on this before. We've had at least one or two dedicated videos on it, but simply if you look at the S&P 500 divided by the unemployment rate squared. So the reason why we're squaring the reason why we're squaring the unemployment rate in the um in the denominator is because we

[00:06:07] want to really punish the metric we're creating. make it really make it start to drop if the unemployment rate goes up because historically when the unemployment rate starts to go up that's when you lead into the final phases of the business cycle that can still play out over years but it is still in fact playing out. So we're going to punish unemployment even more when it goes up it matters a lot. So divided by the unemployment rate squared. Now the labor market is only one part of the equation. If you guys remember the Federal Reserve has two mandates. The first the one the first the first one we just mentioned is the labor market. The second one is inflation. So now we're going to multiply this by the inflation rate in the United States.

[00:07:08] So now we have the S&P 500 divided by the unemployment rate squared. Now we're multiplying by inflation. We're multiplying by inflation. And then that leaves one final thing, the tool that the Federal Reserve uses to control both the unemployment rate and inflation. And that is, you guessed it, interest rates. We're multiplying by that, too. Now, when we look at the metric this creates, what you'll notice is that it creates a fairly common pattern. Now, unfortunately, we don't have the data, uh, you know, for some of the stuff going back to the 1800s, but it does look like Trading View has all the data going back to the 1970s. What's interesting is when you look at this, you can see that you can really clearly visualize the business cycle, right? Where things start to get elevated,

[00:08:10] right? Where things start to get out of hand, we go into some bubble like behavior, but then a recession brings this curve back down to that horizontal level. So that was the sort of the business cycle in the early '7s. And then we had another business cycle here going into the 80s and then ultimately we had one recession. It wasn't enough, two recessions to bring us back down. Okay, things kept going on. No recession throughout here because there was not really any bubble-like behavior. Then we went up and guess what? A recession brought us back down. And then that was the business cycle in the late 1980s. that ended with a 1990 recession. Then in the 90s, we had this business cycle that really started to pick up. And at this point, by 1998, it was already pretty similar to what we

[00:09:11] had already experienced in prior business cycles in terms of how elevated it was. But then what happened? Then we had the dot bubble where things really picked up. And then we had a major crash. Okay? And then we started into the next business cycle. And guess what? How do we go back down? Via a recession. So you can see that all of these business cycles ended with a recession. And that is what brought that is what brought valuations back down to more reasonable levels. The main difficulty that investors have faced over the last several years is that in a lot of ways like we know that valuations have been pretty high. That's never been the argument that the argument is not are valuations high. The argument is is will they go higher? You know, because the last thing people want to do is just sit on the sidelines

[00:10:12] for for several years. Now, if we continue, you can see that there was this business cycle here that really started to turn into bubble-like behavior in 2016, 2017, 2018. And guess what? The pandemic induced recession brought it back down, which brings us to where we are today. We had a massive amount of money printing. interest rates went to zero, right? And then you can see what happened. It led to this. Now, this might seem out of the ordinary, but to some degree, you can see that the extent from which business cycles are getting off of this lower line down here generally has been going up. Okay. So, I mean, again, I know the y-axis doesn't necessarily mean anything

[00:11:13] because of all the metrics that go into it, but if you just bear with me for a moment and we put a price label on all of these and we just look at this, not in terms of like what the number means, but just relative to other numbers. That was 473 or so. That was 821. Then 619. Then all the way up into the.com era 2400. That one was 1370. 1304. So the levels that things are getting extended have already increased in the past from 470 to 820 to 2400. The last two haven't been as big. This one has gone all the way up to 10,000. Right? So, what's interesting is when you look at the the difference between 1974 and 2000, that's about a 5 to 6x difference from that peak to that one right there. And then from this one, 2000 to the current one we just hit at

[00:12:15] 10,000, that's also about a 5x four to 5x move, right? I mean, really, it's about a 4x move, but I don't I mean, I didn't get the numbers exactly. I don't know if I if I, you know, got it perfectly, but let's just call it somewhere between a 4 to 5x move. So, it's not like this is completely new. It just feels this bubble feels crazy because compared to these other ones, it looks crazy. But in the dot era, I mean, I have to imagine that that this bubble felt gigantic compared to the other ones. Now, here's the thing, and this is where some people might get tripped up a little bit. Not every period where the market goes back down to the lows is characterized by a catastrophic recession. It's not. Even though it might seem like it is, it's not. And I want to show you what I mean. Okay? I want to show you what I mean. If you were to overlay the S&P 500 onto this chart, what you'll see is that

[00:13:16] there are times when the stock market corrects 50% in order to get back down to the lows. That happens, right? But in the '9s, in order to get back down here, the market just had a 20% correction. Not all that bad, right? And and you know, it's not like as well, it's not like the market has to bottom when we get down here because remember the market is forward-looking. The market often bottoms before the end of a recession, right? So, if you look at where the market bottomed, it's not always that clear. Does it sometimes bottom when it gets to the horizontal line? Yes. Sometimes it bottoms a little bit later. Sometimes you can see here if you'd waited for it, the bottom would have already come and gone. And that brings

[00:14:18] us to the idea of soft landings versus hard landings. Okay, in 2000 it was a hard landing. In 2008, it was a hard landing. Arguably 2020 was a hard landing, too, even though it was relatively shortlived. 1990 to me, I mean, I know I'm sure at the time it felt bad, but really that's looks more like a soft landing, you know, where yeah, the market dropped 20%, but so what? I mean, it had been going up a lot. Um, and it continued to to to do well. So the point is is how does how do we go from where we are right now back down here to then get into the next phase to the next business cycle, right? Because you could argue that this business cycle, in terms of the extension, the the it was

[00:15:21] here back in late 2022, early 2023 in terms of just how crazy things got with inflation and the unemployment rate being so low. Again, this is not the stock market. What's going on in the economy is a little bit different than what's going on in the stock market. Now, ever since then, the Federal Reserve has tried to engineer a soft landing. So they're slowly unwinding things very very slowly. And for a long time the higher risk assets within each asset class bleed to the lower risk assets within each asset class because we've been under tighter and tighter monetary policy and liquidity isn't flowing as much as it once did. And so when that happens, a lot of zombie a lot of zombie companies die out. A lot of things that have no value die out and they bleed to things that do have value. And that's why if you go further up the risk curve, a lot of altcoins have been bleeding to

[00:16:23] Bitcoin for years and since July, Bitcoin has been bleeding to the stock market. And for a while, the stock market has been bleeding to gold. So, we're basically rolling down the risk curve as the business cycle goes on. The problem is that we run the risk of a hard landing in every case. We never know until after if it's going to be a hard landing or a soft landing. There are examples in history where we did have soft landings. However, just because that's the case doesn't mean we can't be on the lookout for a potential hard landing. One of the things to consider is that a lot of times when the market tops out, it tops out over a long period of time. Okay, think about 6 to 12 months where the market just doesn't really go anywhere and then from there the market

[00:17:26] then starts to drop because the buyers get exhausted and the business cycle has turned. Bitcoin has already gone through that, right? If you look at Bitcoin, you can see that Bitcoin has ba basically went nowhere for a year and now that weakness is really starting to show up. The argument is what if Bitcoin is further up the risk curve than the stock market, which it is, um, in my opinion, then it means that what's happening with Bitcoin could eventually make its way over into the stock market. Now, the things to look for in the stock market would be the same things you saw with Bitcoin, where the market just doesn't go anywhere for a while. Now, it is starting to look like that. That doesn't mean we can't inch higher, but really I mean the S&P was at the same price as back in October. So, it's already been about I mean we're getting close to half a year within just a month

[00:18:27] or two. And so, I just want to put this on everyone's radar because the business cycle can take a really long time to play out. In fact, if you were to overlay, if you were to look at the at the S&P 500 in terms of the money supply, I want you to think about this, and I don't I don't expect this fractal to play out. I I want to be clear, it it's not going to play out exactly the same way that it did back then, but when you look at at some of these charts, you can see just how similar the business cycle sometimes is. And even the 20% drop that we got back in 1998 from the 1996 low lines up with the the 20% drop we got in February to April of 2025 when you take that 2022 low. And then ultimately what happened back then is that the market got a correction around now went back up again and then ultimately everything fell apart. Now, to be

[00:19:28] completely honest, I don't think that this is the best comparison. I don't. And I don't think it's going to play out like it did in the dotcom era. I think it's going to do something slightly different. I think a better way to look at this chart is to look at the S&P divided by gold because in that case, it makes it look more like 2008 or 1973 when the stock market broke down against gold. And you can see that the stock market's doing the same thing against gold right now. Now, every time, not every time, both times that this has happened, it was a warning sign for stocks. Both times in 2008 in 1973, it was a warning sign for stocks and they eventually did fall. That's what's happening right now. So, we already know that midterm years are some of the weakest times in the stock market. the year-to-date ROI. If you look at the year-to- date ROI of stocks, if we look at say the S&P 500, if we look at what's

[00:20:30] going on here so far in 2026 and add the average of prior midterm years, the weakest point is late Q3, early Q4, which by the way happens to be when Bitcoin bottomed last cycle in Q4. And it also happens to be when the S&P bottomed in October of 2022. October is actually a really common month for the S&P to find a low. If you go back and look in the 1970s, you'll see that there was an October low in um 1974 and in 1966. In 1970, it was a May low. So you can see that those are the times where it, you know, some of that some of that seasonality can really start to play out and the midterm years often are the weakest points um where the stock market tends to go down. So, I just want people to think about the business cycle in general. And when you look at the S&P 500 divided by the

[00:21:32] unemployment rate squared times the inflation rate year-over-year and times interest rates, what you'll notice is that we have a pretty good way to visualize the business cycle. And up until this point, everything's being unwound. in a process that has kept the economy afloat. Things haven't turned bad. How do we go from where we are now on this metric to back down here without inducing a recession? That's the hard part. The other hard part is remembering that these business cycles can take place over really, really, really long periods of time. And in the 1990s, if you were to overlay interest rates onto this chart, they were lowering

[00:22:32] rates and then they ended up having to raise rates and then that is ultimately what ended the business cycle. So, you have to sometimes wonder, you know, is it is it just going to go straight down or is there a chance it could go down and then pop up for a while as they lower rates, but then they figure out they have to maybe raise rates because they lowered rates too quickly and then it could drop. There's been plenty of times in history where it doesn't just go straight down and it takes a while to get there. And even in the 2000s, it started to go down and then held on for a few more years before it eventually collapsed. So I think the way to think about it is like this. This is how I think about it. And I just want to be clear um because I have, you know, this is truly my first real business cycle, right? This is really the first one. I don't really consider the pandemic to be a full business cycle. Um technically it was because it ended with a recession.

[00:23:32] So technically this is my second one as an an adult. I mean technically speaking I was an adult in 2008 but barely right barely. So this is my second business cycle but I feel like the first real business cycle. You could argue that the one that we had here in 2019 could have played out in a in a very negative way and a a very long and drawn out way, but we actually got a crisis that ended it in 2007 2008. We got a crisis that ended it instead of just being this slow drawn out thing. If you look at the 80s, sometimes it just is more of a slower drawn out thing where you don't have to have a 50% drop in the market. We've done a pretty good job so far watching this thing slowly come down. And as long as it can slowly come down, then it's always possible we get that soft

[00:24:33] landing. But I have to be honest, right? There's a lot of uncertainty right now in in the markets worldwide. And frankly to just put it as clear as I can, markets hate uncertainty. We recently added to the website the global the world uncertainty index and when you look at the world uncertainty index, it's basically higher than it's ever been with this thing going back to 1990. So, that's one of the reasons I'm not I'm not that sure that we're going to be able to go through the next couple of years completely unscathed from all this uncertainty that we're getting. Um, and I I I do feel like there's a part of me that that could see this whole business cycle playing out within the next couple years, right? Like I my base case at this point is

[00:25:33] that the current business cycle ends within the next 2 to 3 years and then that starts a new one. That is my base case for now. Could it could it be over in 2026? Yeah, it's possible. There's a chance that it it starts to be over and then we get a new chair of the Federal Reserve in a few months. They lower rates and they kind of kick the can down the road for a little bit. To be completely honest, I I think the Federal Reserve could lower interest rates by 50 basis points and not really have any severe consequences for doing so. In fact, it might be an okay idea to do that. Uh because we are starting to see weakness in the unemployment rate. We're starting to see that weakness show uh in the labor market. The times when you get the largest drops are when the unemployment rate really starts to go up in a nonlinear fashion.

[00:26:34] So if we were to just simply look at the unemployment rate, what we want to avoid is a scary moment where it just becomes nonlinear and goes up far quicker than a lot of people are thinking it's going to. Now, for years, the unemployment rate has been trending higher. And for years, hiring has trended down. Hires have trended down. You can see that's been trending down for a long time. Uh quits have been trending down. People don't want to quit their jobs because they're having a hard time finding a new one. Job openings have been trending down as well, and they've really started to drop recently. So, the weakness is already there in the labor market. But the reason why the unemployment rate hasn't entered into that nonlinear trajectory is because the stock market hasn't really started to durably sell off. If the stock market were to drop 10%, 15 20%.

[00:27:34] then that would likely begin the negative feedback loop that would start with layoffs. But then those layoffs lead to less demand, which then mean those companies that laid people off make less money, which then leads to more layoffs. And when people aren't hiring, hiring is already low, job openings are already low. If that part of the process begins, then it could quickly lead into that negative feedback loop. So, how do you plan for something like that? Because, you know, to some degree, it could happen this year or it could happen in three years. I don't know. My guess is that it'll happen before 2028 is over. That's my guess. the way I'm doing it, the way I'm planning for it. And I know it's easy to kind of like look at the stuff and and make fun of it and and to say this stuff is never going to actually happen, but history has a way of repeating itself.

[00:28:36] You know, it it really does. And so, the way I do it is I I think making sure you have some investments in other things besides high-risk assets makes a lot of sense being hedged within other asset classes. We've talked about that a lot. We've talked about being hedged with metals for the last several years. Having a cash position that's just earning you a small rate going into the especially in 2026 isn't always the worst idea. The other sectors, by the way, one of the last sectors to stop being bullish is energy. If you look at the XLE, if you look at energy and you overlay it with the S&P 500, what you'll notice is that energy tends to top out after the S&P does. In fact, if you look at the um the 1990 business cycle, what you'll notice is the S&P topped out, or sorry, this is 2000. The S&P topped out in 2000, uh, March, and then a slightly

[00:29:37] lower high in August. But the XLE continued to go up until the recession hit, until there was no denying the recession. In the 2008 financial crisis, the stock market topped in October of 2007. XLE continued to go up into May of 2008 until it was clear we were in a recession. What's going on now? The XLE is going up. The S&P stalling out. It's all happening again. It's just over a very long time period. Now, fundamentally, why does energy stay bullish longer than the whole market? Well, I think you could argue that our energy demands are only going to grow. So, the only way that energy really starts to sell off is if there's a massive recession. If there's a big recession, then that could temporarily drop demand for energy. Um, if if a lot of businesses are closing and people aren't spending as much money and and

[00:30:39] people aren't traveling as much, right, that could lead to lower energy costs. But when now we're in this AI boom, there's clearly a demand for energy. So, what would take it what would take what would what would it take to actually slow that demand? It would take a recession. And that's often why the energy market stays bullish far longer than the index as a whole. That's one of the reasons is because our energy demands are only ever going to grow. And so the market market participants have to be pretty sure there's no there's only one outcome and it is a recession for energy start to drop into that recession. Now that doesn't mean energy never drops. It can. It just it's the last thing to drop one of the last things to drop going into a recession. And often times it tops in the recession. I mean, in 2008,

[00:31:40] the S&P had already topped out half a year before and energy was still going up. So, we're in a year where with respect to a lot of markets, cash is a good alternative. That doesn't mean there are not other good investments. You just have to know where to look. Now, again, if you want to read about this stuff further, I would recommend going to the website benjaminc.com. You can go to reports and you can download the macro risk memo for February. We talk more about where we are in the business cycle and positioning and that sort of stuff. And if you want to reach out for any inquiries or anything like that, you can do so um on the on the main homepage. Um so make sure you guys check that out and thank you guys for tuning in. If you do want to join the uh ITC Premium, you can do that. Links in the description below, and you can use the coupon code ITC50 at checkout to get 50% off your first month. That's more of an ongoing thing. Uh but the this website is more of a of a macro thing and and more macro

[00:32:42] thinking and where we are within the business cycle. And here's the thing. If you're a millennial and you've never experienced one, if you've never gone through one, I do I think it makes some sense to to at least somewhat prepare. I'm not saying go all in on the idea. I'm just saying make sure you have something set aside so that if the hard landing ever does happen, you can come in and buy up the market and then be set for the next business cycle. That's the ideal outcome. If a hard landing happens. If you're a 100% into the market and a hard landing happens, you're kind of stuck, right? You're kind of stuck. And then you you just kind of have to wait for a while. That's why I think being somewhat hedged for this outcome makes a lot of sense. And right now, the S&P 500 is still basically at all-time highs. You know, I mean, it's just within a few percent of the

[00:33:44] all-time high. In fact, if the S&P were to rally 2%, less than 2%, a little over 1%, we'd be at another all-time high. So, this is a fair time, I think, to give a warning about about this potential idea. It's not like I'm waiting for the S&P to drop 30% and then be like, "Oh, hey, this might be an issue." No, it's at an all-time high. The time to make the consideration, I think, is now to just make the consideration. So, those are my thoughts. I hope this has been a good way to visualize the business cycle. If you're a millennial like I am, and we truly are going into the final stages of the business cycle over the next 1 to two years, then make sure you're prepared to how to how you can handle that. Because if you can handle it well, right, the business cycles, we're going to go through many of them, right? If you're if if you are a millennial, we're

[00:34:45] going to see several of them. If you're an investor, you're going to go through several bare markets and you're going to see some recessions in your lifetime. Okay? It's going to happen. It's just a matter of when. No one knows when, but they'll happen. And so, what I think it make I'm not saying go all in on the idea. I'm just saying be hedged for the outcome because if it happens, it can then really set up your future self because then you can come in, you know, during a potential hard landing. It allows you to scoop up a lot of cheap things and then you just don't have to worry about things for a while. you know, I mean, think about how nice it would have been um in 2008 if you weren't all in on the market and you had a little bit. And maybe there's some parallels between this over here and and what we're maybe seeing now. I mean, you have a low in 2002 and then another low in 2008. Okay, this was a low in 2022. Maybe the

[00:35:46] next major low is 2028, 2029. I don't know. the the really the low was in 2009. So that's why I'm wondering. I mean like I I think it's there's some runway, right? I I'm not saying it's all going to stop. It all has to stop immediately, but when you get to the tail end of business cycles, the market starts to stall out and it just doesn't really go anywhere for a several months. And I'm arguing that we're getting pretty close to that point up here. If you guys like the content, make sure you subscribe to the channel, give the video a thumbs up, and again, check out the website at benjaminc.com. Thank you guys for tuning in. I'll see you next time. Bye.
