[00:00:00] Hi, welcome back to this my fifth data update for 2026. In my first four updates, I looked at markets, equity markets, debt markets, collectibles, gold, Bitcoin, and I looked in the aggregate how these markets performed in 2025. In this session, I want to turn my attention to individual companies and look at divergences of risk across these companies and how best to measure that risk divergence. Saying, why would you care? because I need measures of risk to get hurdle rates. Now, you still might be mystified. Later in the session, I will talk about how you cannot run a business or make investments without a sense of what a hurdle rate is. And you need risk measures to get there. So, we've set the agenda. Let's get started. For something as central as risk, something that runs through corporate finance and investing, we talk about it all the time. It's astonishing how much divergence there is in getting a definition of risk that people have a consensus on. I've heard people describe risk as uncertainty, a completely

[00:01:01] useless distinction because you replace one fuzzy word with another one. I've heard others describe risk as the possibility of a large loss which effectively already translates the downside of risk. And still others talk about outcomes that are worse than expected. Of course, if you've taken a finance class, we've kind of ruined you for life because if I ask you what risk is, you come back with answers like standard deviation, volatility, or if you're daring, even a Greek alphabet, and I won't name which one. But to truly understand risk, I'm going to go back to my favorite definition of risk or dis. It's actually the Chinese symbol for risk. It's really a symbol for big crisis or big risk. It's a combination of two symbols. The first one is symbol for danger. The second one is the symbol for opportunity. Risk is danger plus opportunity. And this is genius [clears throat] because it connects the two at the hip. And he says you can't get one without the other. And it also points out why risk is so appealing to human beings. It

[00:02:04] can't be all negative otherwise we wouldn't take the risks we do. It's a combination of that opportunity attracting and we're at the same time repelled by the threat of danger. I think using this definition of risk points out to something that should be obvious but might not be with the other definition of risk. First is if a risk um risk hedger comes and visits you and talks about all the risks you can avoid or eliminate by hedging. Remember a business that's built around avoiding risk will also be avoiding opportunity. It's not a prudent way to run a business. At the same time, you go to the other end and you say, "I'm going to search out opportunities." And you go, you recklessly pursue these opportunities. That's not good a strategy either because you're going to be exposed to insane amounts of danger. So with that definition of risk in place, let's talk about three variants on risk that I think we need to kind of deal with at least frontly before we start measuring it. The first is if risk is coming up with an outcome that's different from what you expected, that

[00:03:05] outcome can be better than expected, upside risk, or worse than expected, downside risk. Now, be honest with me. Have you ever lay laid awake at night wondering about how a stock that is up 80% is it doesn't [clears throat] bother you, right? In fact, it's downside risk that really is the risk we worry about. So there are some who argue that when you measure risk, you should look at only downside risk. So as you look at the risk measures, we'll talk about this upside versus downside. The second is what's the data that you use to measure the risk. The risk can be you can measure risk by looking at past prices, especially if you have a publicly traded stock. The upside of using prices, they're constantly updated. You have a lot more data. The downside of using prices is they're set by markets, demand and supply, mood and momentum. There are things in that price that don't really reflect any fundamentals for your company. The alternative to price based risk measures are accounting based or intrinsic risk measures where you look

[00:04:06] at something to do with operations, revenues, operating income, net income. And the plus here is you are focusing on what you think of as an intrinsic value metric. The downside is accountants don't measure earnings every day or every hour every day. They usually measure it once a quarter. So you have far less data and accounting smooths out risk. So you can often take a risky company and the accounting might not reveal that risk. The third contrast I'm going to draw is between total risk and non-diversifiable risk. Much of finance as we know it is built around this distinction. Total risk of course is all of the risk you face from a particular investment. Non-diversifiable risk is the portion of that risk that you will face if you're a diversified investor. Now it's a what the heck are you talking about? You know, if you think about any in any company and you look at all of the risks that affect that company. Now some of those risks come from things the company does. Management making a better

[00:05:06] or worse than expected decision, a project that pays off much better than expected or worse than expected. And some of those risks come from macro variables, interest rates changing, tariffs. The reason I draw that contrast is if you're an investor who is um who's who has all your money in one company, of course, this this contrast doesn't matter. You're exposed to total risk. But if you're a diversified investor, an institutional investor who owns 20, 30, 40 stocks, the risk you will see in an investment is the risk that you cannot diversify away. This is central to understanding why different models give you different risk metrics, but total versus non-diversifiable risk. So, let's say you're sitting down trying to figure out what the right measure of risk for you is. I'm not going to thrust my choices on you because I think we need to each decide for ourselves what the best way to measure risk is. There are two basic questions I will ask you. The first is do you believe the marginal investors? And you're saying who are

[00:06:07] marginal in they're the investors who own a lot of stock and trade your stock. Do you believe the marginal investors who price risk in your company or in companies are diversified? Yes or no? The answer is going to drive your choices. If you say yes that you're willing to buy into that diversified investor argument, then the next question I'm going to ask you is do you believe in price based risk measures? And your answer might be I don't like market prices. I'm an intrinsic value person. In which case you you know to follow up you got to go with the accounting data. You can look at accounting numbers to come up with your proxies for risk. But you're looking at only the portion of the accounting earnings that you would face as a diversified investor. Tricky but there there are these these these concepts called accounting betas where you look at how much of your earnings is is explained by the market. There are some I know who use the cost of debt which because they can observe it and they use uh estimated cost of equity based on the cost of debt. So you basically said I don't want to use price based measures

[00:07:07] but you still want to focus only on the risk you cannot diversify away. Of course we are willing to accept price based measures and the door opens to much of what we pass as you know status quo in risk and return models in finance. The capital asset pricing model has been around since 1964. It's built on the presumption margin investors diversified and adds on other assumptions. No transactions cost, no private information, which means you can't pick stocks. And if you make those assumptions, it turns out that not only are marginal investors diversified, they're supremely diversified. They hold a little bit of everything, a market portfolio. So in the CAPM, the risk of a stock is the risk added to the market portfolio. And of course we capture that with the beta. The alternatives of CAPM, the arbitrage pricing model, a multifactor model stay with the same script, but all that changes instead of putting all your risk in one beta, they allow for multiple betas offering against multiple factors. So that's if

[00:08:07] you believe marginal investors are diversified. But what if you don't? I'm still going to ask you whether you like price-based measures because if you say yes, I can come up with measures of total risk that come from prices. I can look at price volatility. There are proxy models. What are proxy models? We say small companies are risky, large companies are say, tech companies are risky, utilities are safe. You're letting something stand in. There's a CAPM plus. You start with the risk-free rate and the beta and risk premium that the CAPM does and then you add premiums for things that the model misses. Small cap stocks, liquidity, and there's a final approach which is interesting where you try to solve from the market price for a company what the implied cost of equity and capital are. In other words, what discount rate would give you the a value equal to the market price? If you don't believe in price based measures and that marginal investors diversified, then basically you have no choice but to stay with accounting

[00:09:08] earnings and look at the volatility earnings or whether the company makes or loses money. This is your clearing place of so before you can take issue with somebody uses the cap but you need an alternative. So think through what your choice is going to be. So whatever your judgment is on the right risk measure, I'm willing to live with it because it's your money. So let's take a look at how some of these risk measures look like across companies at the start during 2025. I'm going to start with accounting risk measures. I'm going to look at three. The first and simplest is I'm going to look at whether a company makes or loses money. And here's the rationale. We ask many investors what makes a company risky. There are their answer is it can lose money. So you have a company that never loses money. It's in a sense safer than one that loses money every 2 or 3 years. So look at the percentage of the time a company loses money. It's intuitive. It's simple, but it's not very data heavy. You're throwing away a lot of information. The second is to look at the earnings over a

[00:10:09] period of time, in this case 10 years, and compute the standard deviation those earnings. Now, when you do that, there's a catch. When you have high earnings, your standard deviation is also going to be a high number because it's a it's a it's it's determined by the units you do it in. So we have $100 million in earnings and I compute the standard deviation over time. It's going to be higher than for a $10 million earnings company. So I standardize it. I divide the standard deviation in earnings by the average earnings over the period. It's called coefficient of variation and I do both operating and net income. The plus is it's an intrinsic value number. The minus is it can be skewed by accounting smoothing as well as the fact that earnings can become negative. There's a third accounting metric that I'm not going to talk about in this session, but I'll come back and talk about later where you look at the debt load. Debt as a multiple of EIDA or the interest coverage ratio. The argument here is companies with a heavier debt load are riskier than ones with a lower debt load. Technically, that might be true, but there's a whole lot of stuff

[00:11:11] you're missing. You focus just on debt. Just as a hypothetical, think of a very risky tech company. Operations are all over the place that has no debt. with this metric that company will look safe and it should not. So let's start by looking at earnings volatility across sectors. I took my 48,156 companies. I looked at earnings over the last 10 years and then I computed the coefficient of variation, the standard deviation income divided by the average income. I did it for both operating income which should capture business risk and net income which should include both business risk and the leverage effect you have. So I've comput I've reported the the the first quartile the median the third quartile for both coefficients. Let's focus on the median numbers. To the extent that I trust this measure utilities are the safest business out there and the riskiest business is energy. Okay. That surprised me. I expected technology but energy had the highest coefficient

[00:12:11] of variation operating income because the underlying commodity is so volatile. When you focus on net income, utilities and financials now are tied for the for the for the for the for the least risky and the most risky again you get you get energy, you get communication services, but not as much with technology. Part of the reason for that is technology companies don't use a whole lot of debt. So that kind of ties to intuition, right? Utilities are safe. You're seeing the lowest volatility in earnings there. Now let's move to the other earnings metric where you look at the percentage of time a company loses money. Here I've looked at the cross-section the percentage of companies within each sector that make and lose money. So you take communication services in 2025. 56.18% of those companies made money. 43.82% lost money. Remember the higher the negative percentage the more riskier business becomes. Using that proxy again

[00:13:12] you look across all firms about 60% made money on an operating income basis 40% lost money safest business utilities 81 a 12% of the time they have positive operating income followed by consumer staples and real estate and then you see a big drop off as you go to health care which had which had the lowest percentage of money-making companies. Now when you look at net income, you get a pretty similar ranking. Utilities remain the among the least risky because the highest percentage make money. Financials kind of catch up 73%. And then the rest you see spread out across the different businesses. So voluntary earnings percentage of the time companies make money. Let's move on to price base measures. Again, I'm going to start with a very simplistic v variant where I'm going to take the high price during a period and subtract out the low price and divide by the sum of the two. You're saying, "What the heck

[00:14:12] are you doing?" Let's say you had a stock that is incredibly stable. The price never moves. You know what's going to happen, right? The high price is going to be equal to the low price. So, the numerator is going to be zero. The denominator is going to be high price plus low price. You're going to get a high low risk measure of zero. In contrast, if you have a stock that moves from 20 to 120, that's low and high. The difference is 100, and you divide it by by 20 plus 120, you're going to get 140, the number will be a high number. The more variation you get between the high and the low price, the higher the high low risk measure is going to be. In effect, you're measuring range, and you're arguing that companies that are riskier move in a wider range. Pretty intuitive. It's simple to compute. It's minimalist in terms of the data that it uses. The second approach, use all of the price data. You compute the standard deviation, the percentage changes in the stock price. So, they're comparable across companies. You use all the data. And it um implicitly though when you

[00:15:14] standard deviation you have that problem with upside and downside risk getting mingled because you can have a high standard deviation stock price because a stock did much much better than expected or you can have a high standard deviation stock price because the stock did much worse than expected. And finally you have beta. Beta measures the portion of the standard deviation your stock price that you cannot diversify away. how your stock moves with the market. It's focused on measuring risk that is not diversifiable. The plus is it measures risk to diversified investors. The minus is you're making some additional assumptions about that cold movement, the correlation of the market and estimating it might be noisy. So let's start with the high low risk measure. So what I've in the se in this uh particular table is I've looked at the high low risk measure across the sectors. So focus on the median again. The least risky sector is utilities 0.24. The riskiest is you know and it's

[00:16:18] close. There are really no outliers but healthcare is the as the highest high low risk measure. So if you buy into the high low risk measure utilities again come in as the safest business and you're getting a mix of risky businesses at the top. What about standard deviation? By now I feel like a broken record. If you look at the median standard deviation stock prices, guess what? Utilities are again the safest. Now financials are close. And at the other end of the extreme, you have technology, you've got materials. So and and healthcare again. Now one of the things I want to emphasize, you look across both accounting and these these price based measures. Notice something. The rankings you get across sectors, the sectors you identify as safest and riskiest don't seem to change as you move from metric to metric. What I'm trying to say is maybe we spend too much time arguing with each other about beta versus earnings variance when in fact

[00:17:19] much of the time they're pointing you in the same direction. So I'm not sure that I'll stop that debate, but it's something to think about the next time you're in a heated debate about one risk measure versus another. And finally when you look at betas again you can see the lowest beta. So this focus is only on the risk that you cannot diversify. Lowest beta actually is consumer staples but utilities and real estate and financials are close by. The riskiest businesses according to beta are technology which suggests that more of the risk in technology companies is market risk pushing up the beta. Now all of this discussion of risk measures for me again I'm as I said I'm a pragmatist is because I need a hurdle rate. You're saying what's a hurdle rate? Well I teach corporate finance. Corporate finance a hurdle rate is that minimum acceptable rate of return you will need for an investment to passm. So you're looking at accounting returns on a

[00:18:20] project. The returns have to exceed your hurdle rate from the project. The accounting returns return on equity return capital. If you're looking at a net present value, the hurdle rate becomes a discount rate that you use to get the net present value. If you're doing an internal rate of return, you compare to the hurdle rate. So a hurdle rate becomes an essential ingredient, you know. So what should a hurdle rate be? A hurdle rate should be the return you can make on an investment of equivalent risk today. Let me repeat that again. The hurdle rate we should be using shouldn't be the cost of funding for the company. It should be the return you can make on an investment of equivalent risk. It's an opportunity cost. It's what you can make on an investment elsewhere. But that investment has to be of equivalent risk. That's the basis for the cost to capital. I know the words cost to capital suggest a funding cost, but in the context of investment analysis valuation, that's not the real meaning of opport of cost to capital. It's an

[00:19:21] opportunity cost. In fact, if you think about the two ways you can raise money, debt and equity. Here's how the opportunity cost argument kicks in with each one. Take the cost of equity. Investors have invested your equity. The cost of equity is the rate of return those equity investors will demand given what they can make on equity investments of equivalent risk in the market today. Yeah, equivalent risk. The cost of debt is the interest rate that those lending you long-term will charge. But that too is an opportunity cost because if you could lend to some lend to somebody else with the same default risk as me, it's the rate you would have charged them. So both the cost of equity and the cost of debt or opportunity cost and the cost of capital is just a weighted average of the two weighted by how much you use of each. Now everything you do in business is somewhere in that hurdle rate. What I've done here is taken the cost of equity and cost of debt and talked about the different factors that play into them. In an earlier session, we talked about

[00:20:21] currency choice. Where does it show up? It shows up in your risk rate. We talked about where a company operates, what countries that shows up in your risk equity risk premium. And how risky you are relative to other companies is what we're trying to capture with our risk measures. whether it's a beta or based on volatility or earnings variability. That's your endgame. Is my company riskier or safer? Those are the things that go into cost of equity. For your pre-tax cost of debt, you start with the same risk-free rate choice. But then you have a default spread. What is that driven by? Your choice as a company to how much to borrow as well as how stable and predictable and large your earnings are and the macro factors to kick in. If you're in a recession, your chances of defaulting went up. No matter how safely you've run the business so far, those are the things that drive cost to capital. I compute the cost of capital for all 48,156 companies in my sample. I don't mean to make it sound like it's an immense amount of work because I do make some

[00:21:22] simplistic assumptions that make my life easier. Put differently, if you ask me to comput the cost of cap for an individual company, I would probably have more finance and more nuance. But because I'm doing this for 48,156 companies, I'm going to make some broad brush assumptions. For the beta, I'm going to use the unlevered beta of the company's key business. So even in three different businesses, we get 80% from retail. I'm going to use the retail beta. I'm going to lever it up reflecting how much debt you've chosen to have as a company. And that becomes the starting point for the cost of equity. the leverage effect I'm going to capture with your debt to equity ratio and the net effect and the but but the risk-free rate and the equity risk have nothing to do so basically they reflect where you do business and in this case because I don't have the breakdown geographically for each company in my big data set I give you the equity risk premium of the market you're incorporated so the beta

[00:22:22] is a beta of the business you're in an unlevered beta that leverages your debt to equity ratio for the currency I do everything in dollars because I want them comparable. I want to be able to compare the cost of capital across regions. And for the equity risk premium, I looked at the country in which you were incorporated. For the cost of debt, I start with the same risk-free rate, which is in dollars. For the default spread, if you have a rating, and about 20% of the companies in my sample had a rating, I use the rating to come up with a default spread. If not, I used the interest coverage ratio to estimate a rating, which then gave me a default spread. You add those two numbers up, you got a dollar cost of debt. For the weights of equity and debt, I use the market value of equity and the book value of debt. I know it's cheating, but 48,156 companies, I'm not going to compute the market value of debt for each of them. For the tax rate, I use the marginal tax rate of the country in which you operate. So, there are shortcuts I've taken, right? the equity risk premium is

[00:23:22] really supposed to be a weighted average of the different countries you operate in. When you look at um the the tax rate, if you're in three different countries, maybe you'd use a weighted average margin tax rate. Here, I've taken the shortcut because I wanted to have cost of capital for all of my companies. Now, once I have those costs of capital, I'm going to superimpose on it another construct that you've seen me use before. In an ear earlier session I talked about a country life cycle but that country life cycle came from work I'd done on corporate life cycles. So I went back to my corporate life cycle and I thought about the evolution of uncertainty as you go from young companies to companies in decline. With your very young companies you have high uncertainty. The business model is unformed. The founder is unknown. And as you mature that uncertainty should decrease. But again as you move from maturity to decline it'll pick up again because you again get some idiosyncratic effects. Much of the uncertainty though

[00:24:24] with young companies is estimation uncertainty. So when you think about a young company being more having more uncertainty than larger companies mostly from micro from from estimation issues. Economic uncertainty is real. You can't make it go away. the co the contrast between micro and macro. With young companies, most of your risk is micro. As you mature, the risk proportion shifts towards macro. And finally, there is this distinction between discrete and continuous uncertainty. Now, discrete uncertainty, the risk you might not make it very high in very young firms and in very old firms, but it's mostly continuous risk in the middle. And that could play a role in cost of equity and capital. So if you look at that description seem to be at first sight that you know uncertainty is greatest for young firms they should have the highest cost of equity and capital but before you go further remember what I said about most of that uncertainty it's estimation and micro uncertainty and if

[00:25:25] you're estimating a cost of equity and capital to a diversified investor I'm not sure it translates into a higher cost of capital so when I looked at the actual cost of capital by so what I did was I took my 48,000 companies, broke them down by corporate age. So I looked at how old a company was by looking at when it was founded and you know through today. So it's founded in 1934 2026 it's 92 years old and I computed the age for every company. Then the I broke the companies down into 10 deciles from youngest to oldest. Took a look at cost of equity and you can take a look if you want and I couldn't discern a pattern. Maybe you can. Initially it goes up then it goes down then it goes up again and goes down. Am I surprised? Not really because of what I said earlier about much of the risk in young companies being diversifiable or company specific. I did look at the debt ratios and here there's a pattern right as companies get older and more mature their debt ratios tend

[00:26:27] to go up and perhaps that's the reason there's a little more of an effect on the cost of capital especially at the oldest the top two deciles. you see a drop off in cost of capital presumably because they borrow more money. So what's the bottom line? Uncertainty varies clearly across the life cycle. Cost of equity doesn't do very much but cost of capital might actually also decline as you age as a company. As a final piece of the puzzle, I also took my individual company cost of capital and I charted a histogram. Again, nothing magical about this. I've counted the number of companies with cost of capital and they're all in dollars. So I can put them all into the same distribution. As you can see that left end of the distribution is companies with cost of capital less than 6%. You know, so 5 1/2, five, that's about as low as it gets. And at the other extreme, you have companies with cost of capital higher than 15%. The middle of the distribution is between 8 and 1/2 and 9 12%. But I went further. I broke

[00:27:28] down by sub region what the distribution of cost to capital is. This is one of my mo most one of those tables that I use all through the year for a bunch of different reasons. One is let's say I'm valuing a young company and I'm in a bit of a hurry and I don't want to get bogged down in B. The young company has no history. The business model is still forming. It's asking for trouble trying to finesse the cost of capital and estimate bas and risk premiums and default spreads. So it said here's what I'm going to do. You have a risky company. It's a US company. I'm going to get you started with the 9.88% cost of capital. If you're wondering where the 9.88% comes from, that's actually the cost of capital for the the 90th percentile for US companies. I've given it a risky company's cost of capital. And over time for this company, I will lower its cost of capital perhaps to 7.79% which is the median. This distribution then guides my cost of capital choice rather than the more long more involved process of estimating a

[00:28:31] cost of equity and a cost of debt. The second place it helps me is when I'm reviewing somebody else's valuation and I see a cost of capital. I can very quickly see if it passes the smell test. So let's say I'm looking at a valuation of a US company you've done in US dollars and you tell me its cost of capital is 15%. I'm going to pause right there and say, do we need to carry this further? Because that 15% is so out of the realm of what I'd expect at a public company that's just not going to stand. So, as you look across this table, you can see that, you know, it gives you a way in which you can check the numbers. One final point. I've I've long argued that we we as people who value companies, appraisers, analysts, spend way too much time estimating the cost of capital and much too little time on estimating growth and margins and cash flows. I'll tell you my rationale for why I think spending very much time on the cost of

[00:29:33] capital is a waste of time. Take a look at US companies. Take a look at take a look at the first Desile 5.26% 26% and the ninth decile 9.88%. Think about what that tells you. 80% of US companies have cost of capital between 5.26 and 9.88%. That's a pretty tight range. Even if you go global, it's 6.28 to 11. We're not looking at 5 to 35. We're looking at 6 to 12. This is what you want to spend 3 4 5 days finessing. Now the when you screw up a valuation, I'm not saying that's should be your end game. It's never going to be because you got your cost to capital massively wrong. It's because you got your margins off, your story was off. So keep your, you know, keep keep this distribution on hand the next time you look at a valuation because it'll give you a sanity check. So what what's the bottom line? To invest in a business or run a business, you need hurdle rates and risk

[00:30:33] measures are a means to an end. Don't forget that that they're a means to an end. And while models and equations might be how you get these numbers, you always go back to first principle that opportunity cost notion because it's going to guide you on the best measures. So as we enter 2026, we're now in our fourth year with US dollar risk-free rates around 4%. And you can see it reflected in the cost of capital across the board. 8 to 9% for US companies 9 to 10 wasn't that long ago 2021 2022 when risk- free rates in the US were 2%. So leading into 2022 I think the T-bond rate was less than 2%. I mean less than 2% the cost of capital becomes 67. You're saying so what one is when the risk-free rate jumped in 2022 it was a shock companies had become so used to having low hurdle rates and low cost of capital under low risk-free rate regime that it took adjustment. Clearly they've adjusted. The second is I know

[00:31:36] companies that have picked their cost of capital, picked a number, made it their cost of capital in 1988 and never revisited it since. I think corporate hurdle rates are a mistake to begin with because corporations have multiple projects with different risk and you should have project specific hurdle rates. But it gets even worse when that corporate hurdle rate is etched in stone. I hope you found the session useful in developing your thinking about hurdle rates and risk measures and I wish you the very best. Thank you for for listening.
