[00:00:00] You said the Federal Reserve is going to start expanding its balance sheet. My guess is that my guess is that they will have to. Uh otherwise, they'll lose control over the the repo market, and they don't want that to happen. Joseph, great to see you. Welcome back to Monetary Matters. Thanks so much for inviting me. It's a pleasure to be here, and congratulations on the success on your show. It's such great guests over the past few months. Appreciate you saying that. Joseph, obviously you're writing at fedguy.com. You used to be a senior trader for the New York Federal Reserve, which is where all you know, the bulk of the monetary operations go. Just coming out of the Federal Reserve meeting, we had the interest rate cut from 4.1% roughly to to 3.8% roughly. A lot of questions about what the the the Federal Reserve is going to do in December. Is there going to be a cut? The market was pricing a cut. Powell said, "Not so fast." Uh his exact words were "A cut in December is not a foregone conclusion, far from it." Which for J. Powell, that's basically saying like, "Did I stutter?" You know, that's a that's a big big bombshell. But Joseph, want to set aside rates for a second. You know,

[00:01:01] at the 20-minute, 30-minute mark, we'll we'll talk more about rates. Want to start out with the balance sheet and money markets, which is your expertise. That's what you were doing at at the New York Fed. Powell dropped a big announcement that the Federal Reserve's reduction in its balance sheet or quantitative tightening QT is going to be effectively over on December 1st. So, break this down for our audience here today. What's the significance of it, and what's your interpretation of the the specific mechanics? >> First, I'll talk a little bit about why they start they're stopping QT. And then I'll talk about the much more much bigger question that is what the final composition of the Fed's balance sheet is going to be going forward, because that's the part that's actually going to have a market impact. So, the Fed has been shrinking its balance sheet through QT for some time. And when they shrink their balance sheet, what they're doing is they're slowly withdrawing liquidity out of the financial system. Now, they want to make sure that their balance sheet is just small enough so that the banking system has enough uh cash to function. Now, a bank holds deposits at the Fed, they're called

[00:02:01] reserves. So, that's what they're thinking about. Now, the problem is that the Fed doesn't actually know what the right size of what what right size for their balancing is. Or another way of saying this is how many reserves the banking system needs. Now, they have models and so forth, but at the end of the day, they don't really know. Now, the last time they did QT, they kept shrinking their balance sheet, and in September of 2019, there's a tremendous spike in the repo market that forced them to intervene. Now, the Fed thinks that one of the reasons why there was that huge spike in the repo market back then was because they overdid QT. So, they're very eager to avoid that right now. So, when they're looking at whether or not they're shrinking their balance sheet too much, they look at market rates, specifically market rates in short-term funding markets like repo rates and the federal funds rate. Now, over the past few months, what we've seen is that the reverse repo facility balances have gone down slowly and now are basically around zero. So, reverse repo facility is basically a

[00:03:02] place where money market funds park their excess cash, and the Fed looks at it as kind of a repository of excess liquidity in the financial system. So, when that facility went to zero, repo rates began to gradually drift higher, and over the past few weeks, they've traded higher than Fed funds and higher than interest on reserves. That sent a strong signal to the Fed that, you know, maybe we should stop doing this QT. And that's what Chair Powell mentioned today. Now, QT has actually uh been tapered over the past few months, so it's really not a big deal in the market anymore. Uh but they noted today that they're going to stop it effective December. So, that's kind of the big thing they did with their balance sheet. Now, from my perspective, when I look at repo rates, and since the Fed likes to focus on this, if you're at the Federal Reserve, one of the most important things you can do is you have to control short-term interest rates, because that's how you adjust policy, right? You're trying to toggle short-term interest rates to adjust the financial conditions through the wider uh market and impact the real economy. So,

[00:04:04] your bread and butter is being able to control short-term interest rates. So, repo rates are part of that complex, and it's driven by supply and demand like anything else. Part of the supply of funding available to lend in repo is related to the size of the Fed's balance sheet. That's that's definitely true there. But the demand though, that's largely because the United States runs a $2 trillion fiscal deficit, and at the end of the day, some of the people who buy the Treasury debt finances those purchases uh in the repo market. So, that's kind of necessary, because let's say that you're issuing $2 trillion in debt. Let's say that you're you're you're um you know, the US Treasury, you show up to the market, you sell like 10 billion. Most people don't have that lying uh you know, under a couch or in their pocket or something like that. So, you need someone who's be able to elastically expand their balance sheet so buy that unleveraged. Because if you buy it unleveraged, you get the money instantly, right? You don't have to rely on, you know, inflows from your investors or premium payments from your

[00:05:05] uh insurance people who buy insurance from you. So, at the end of the day, uh a lot of the purchases in the cash Treasury market uh to finance the US Treasury are funded in the repo market. And as you have tremendous uh issuance, demand for repo increases. So, the Fed right now, they're stopping their balance sheet thinking that, you know, this is this is going to have an impact on uh repo rates. But at the end of the day, as long as the fiscal deficit continues to grow, you have increasing demand for repo funding. And so, repo rates are going to go higher. So, my expectation is that uh they're going to have to be adding liquidity into the financial system shortly. And they can do this in a couple ways. Uh one thing that's different this time compared to the past is that they have something called a standing repo facility. And what that means is that uh if you are a securities dealer, you can go and borrow from the Fed uh and uh borrow repo from the Fed uh basically at any time you want. And they've been doing that, but really

[00:06:06] not a lot. And also, obviously not enough to constrain the repo rates. And there are probably technical technical reasons for that um with regard to uh so >> [clears throat] >> Okay. Super in the weeds, but if if you're in SRF, you're borrowing in tri-party repo, and that's not balance sheet friendly. It's not nettable, and so I think that's part of reason. Uh but what they're likely to do going forward is once they realize that stopping QT uh does not put downward pressure on repo rates. Once they see repo rates continuing to rise, they're probably going to be buying a lot of bills to add liquidity into the financial system. They call these reserve management purchases, and they did that in 2019 as well. So, I that could happen actually maybe as soon as December. I mean, it's really hard to say about about these things, because so much of it is uh opaque. Um like the spike in the set repo markets in September 2019 came kind of out of the blue. I I was there at that time. It was kind of exciting. Um so, I I expect them to be expanding

[00:07:09] their balance sheet again shortly. But you know, that that's actually pretty technical. The really really big picture that's going to affect impact markets going forward is just what the ultimate composition of the Fed's balance sheet will be. Now, that's kind of important, because the way that the Fed impacts market pricing through their balance sheet is through the supply and demand of Treasury securities to the private sector. So, if the Fed, for example, is going out and buying a bunch of 10-year Treasuries, there's less 10-year Treasuries available for the private sector, right? Less supply. Uh lower lower interest rates. Now, right now, the Fed has a portfolio whose duration is pretty high, much higher than the overall markets. And that's by design. They bought all these Treasury securities because they wanted to put downward pressure on long-dated interest rates. So, they swallowed up a whole bunch of duration. On the FOMC right now, and this is something they're still discussing, but from what we've heard, and we've heard from about a couple governors right now, is that they're going to be pretty

[00:08:09] hawkish on the balance sheet. Governor Waller, for example, would like to, you know, maybe just hold uh you know, hold a lot more Treasury bills, as many Treasury bills as they have reserve balances. So, that'd be upping it significantly by over a couple trillion. So, what does that mean? Well, if you're holding uh if you have to hold let's say 3 trillion bills, that means you're going to have hold fewer coupons, and that means that the private sector is going to have to hold a lot more duration. So, you know, that's kind of uh super hawkish um in that it will increase the supply of duration to the market, and maybe they'll do that slowly. And really depends on uh who's on the committee. Another member, uh Governor Bowman, has actually been suggested that the Fed should outright sell mortgage-backed securities. Now, I mean, that's going to be you know, So, if you sell mortgage-backed securities, the market's going to have to absorb it. That means higher mortgage rates. And uh you know, that's that could be potentially pretty disruptive.

[00:09:09] And uh I think it's going to make a lot of people in the White House unhappy. Ha ha ha. But listen, I think what I've taken away from this so far is that the people who have been very hawkish on the balance sheet uh have been the Trump appointees, the same people who have been clamoring for rate cuts over the past, you know, few meetings. So, I think that suggests that maybe there's there's the Fed is still functioning as a, you know, pretty independent organization. I'm just talking about Governor Bowman and and Governor uh Waller, because they were the people who have been clamoring for rate cuts in the past recent month, going so far as to uh dissent. So, there's a narrative out there that all these guys, because they're Trump appointees, that they're just going to, you know, cut rates and do what the boss says, but uh what they're saying with the balance sheet is very hawkish. So, I think that it's it's a little bit complicated than that narrative. So, I'll get back to the balance sheet in a second, but what you're saying is

[00:10:09] that the President Trump appointees on the Federal Reserve Board are uh they are not being super dovish and doing whatever the president wants on the balance sheet counter to the narrative that they are doing whatever the president wants. On the interest rate story, how are you evaluating that narrative? So, I would just add one more thing here. So, in in uh the in 2019, the Fed had a confidential memo that was subsequently declassified to the public. And in that memo, they said that, you know, if we were more hawkish on the balance sheet, longer dated interest rates would go up and we could cut more on the front end. And my sense is that rather than, you know, these these Trump appointees just, you know, trying to please the big man, uh they are being very political and diplomatic in that they are giving the president the rate cut he wants, but on the other hand, taking it away by being more hawkish on the balance sheet. So, you end up with a steeper curve, but the impact on the economy is about the same.

[00:11:10] So, I I think that's actually what's happening at the Fed. So, it doesn't seem like the Fed is completely uh part of the executive uh just yet. Probably will be in the coming years, and maybe it should be. I don't know, but not yet. Now, on the interest rate part, I think we should kind of level set a little bit. So, the last time we had a Fed meeting, we had the dot plot, and the dot plot guided towards two more cuts this year. So, a rate cut today and a rate cut in December. Now, between then and now, it's been a difficult time because of the government shutdown. The Fed has been basically flying blind, not receiving a lot of the important data that would usually inform their decisions. Now, they do have access to private data like ADP, like Adobe data, and they have their own internal network where they go and they talk to people, and they write the Beige Book about it. Now, between then and now, it seems like the uh well, inflation has come in a little bit better than expected, but at the end of the day, it's still around 3%, and

[00:12:12] the labor market still, you know, kind of slow, trudging along, low hiring, low firing, not doing anything there, but not deteriorating. And heading into today, the market was fully pricing in one cut today and one cut in December. But the but Powell surprised the market by just openly pushing back against that, I think his memorable words were not a foregone conclusion, forcefully suggesting that maybe he's not going to cut rates in December. Uh I think the rationale for that seems to be that the labor market is not deteriorating as much, and if you look at these GDP nowcasts, it looks like growth is you know, growth is okay. So, that leads us to and you know, not fully pricing in a December cut, maybe it won't be there, and that I think that's where we are on rates right now. So, going into today, there there was fully priced, as you said, that there'd be a cut in December. That cut has been taken away, a good chunk of those odds. So, the interest rate market

[00:13:13] has changed. Interestingly, when Powell said that not a foregone conclusion about December, you know, the market stock S&P was down around 76 basis points, regained a lot of that. So, just goes to show, we are not in 2022 anymore, and you know, the days of J. Powell's hawkishness causing the stock market to decline 2, 3, 4% in a day, and a you know, a large bear market in 2022 was that we are not in that day. We are not those days are over, you know, at least at least so far. Joseph, want to get back to the balance sheet, your your first comment. So, the Federal Reserve has been withdrawing liquidity since the middle of 2022, um just 8.9 trillion dollars to around 6.5 trillion dollars. So, you know, two 2.2, 2.3 trillion dollars of liquidity removal balance sheet uh reduction. And [snorts] it's been a a long and slow and somewhat steady process. That process is going to go on for 30 to 32 more days, but it is going to end on

[00:14:14] December 1st, and the uh the Treasuries are going to just constantly be reinvested. So, hold steady. The mortgage-backed securities that the Federal Reserve owns are going as they mature, they are going to be reinvested into Treasury bills. So, the aggregate balance sheet, the Federal Reserve assets are going to stay flat, but the composition is going to change, and mortgage-backed securities are going to basically be converted as they mature into Treasury bills. That itself is kind of a form of tightening, right? Because mortgage-backed securities have more duration and convexity risk, and just replacing, you know, Treasury bill has almost no risk at all. So, you're you're supplying the private sector with an increased uh mortgage-backed securities. So, it's it is still somewhat a form of tightening, right? Well, I I would point out that mortgage-backed securities that the Fed holds uh have very low coupons, so they're not going to prepay quickly. So, someone who So, mortgage-backed securities get paid down either monthly as principal payments go go go through,

[00:15:16] and that takes 30 years, or if someone refinances their mortgage, that is to say, takes out a new loan to repay the old loan. Now, because the Fed bought these mortgages during the very low interest rates of the pandemic, uh these are like, you know, 2.5, 3% mortgages, and no one's going to uh you know, take out a new mortgage to repay that. So, the monthly principal payments that the Fed is receiving each month, it's really low. It's like, you know, say 14, 15 billion a month. So, it's I don't think it's going to have a big impact. Uh but but when it comes to the mortgage portfolio, though, the Fed would like to have no mortgages on its balance sheet. It wants to have a final portfolio that's all Treasuries. The rationale for that is that they feel that owning mortgages is basically the Fed allocating credit to the private sector, and they don't want to do that, even though they've been doing that for for quite some time, and to an enormous enormous size, too, right? They have about a couple trillion on their balance sheet. So, if they wanted to go to an

[00:16:17] all-Treasury portfolio, uh they probably have to wait 30 years. Now, that's a long time. You don't really set goals and just take 30 years to achieve them. So, there is a possibility that they could try to speed that up a little bit by selling mortgages. I think that's really unlikely. It'd be a very hawkish outcome. We haven't seen them do that before. Uh looking across the world, the Bank of England has uh shrunk their balance sheet by by selling outright, but uh usually people just let them roll off. So, that that is a possibility. So, I think that's a that is one of the interesting things that happened today. Mortgage principal principal is going to be reinvested in not just Treasuries, but Treasury bills, and Powell noted that's part of the effort to reduce the duration of their overall portfolio. But again, it's going to be so slow and and so minor, it's not going to be meaningful. I don't think it'll affect the market. And [snorts] and now, let's connect the balance sheet to repo. As you said, the Federal Reserve's reverse repo facility, which are liabilities of the Federal

[00:17:19] Reserve's, has been shrinking down and are now effectively at zero. So, the excess cash parked at the Federal Reserve has been deployed into the financial system as the Treasury has increased a lot of Treasury bills that have been bought by the money market funds that were buying um the the uh that were investing in in the repo facility. Um and and so, now they are lending to hedge funds who are now buying the Treasuries on on credit, you know, 10, 50, 100 times levered. Um I've heard 200, 300, 400 times levered. Um in the in the so-called basis trade. So, Joseph, you know, brought painting painting with a very broad brush, the US deficit and US increased Treasury issuance. From 2000 to 2010, bought it was funded a lot by foreigners, mean a lot of which was China. Let's say, 2010 to 2022 was financed by uh the Federal Reserve and >> [laughter] >> yeah, a lot of China, but also you domestic banks, domestic households,

[00:18:19] domestic corporates. A lot of the financing of the Treasury, and you you've been pointing this out on fedguy.com, has been now from the hedge funds. So, it's it's levered like a bank buying Treasuries, but they're borrowing in the repo market, and they're borrowing from money market funds. And as a result, the demand for borrowing, as you say, is insatiable. So, the the repo rates are spiking and ever so slightly. So, you know, as Powell noted today, over the past 3 weeks, there have been elevated signs of I'll call it stress, where SOFR rates are 10, maybe 20 basis points uh above the the Federal Reserve rates, and you know, I'll go both with the New York Fed as well as your website to get the exact data, but uh even the effective federal funds rate, which is supposed to be the most vanilla rate in the world, is like 3 to 5 basis points above where it should. So, stress is in the the money markets. Tie this all together, explain this to me as well as to the audience, cuz I I really need your your expertise here. And then also uh explain you know,

[00:19:20] in on your uh your your most recent piece on fedguy.com, balance sheet dominance, you talk about how the Federal Reserve is losing control of its balance sheet policy to the growing fiscal deficit. Explain explain that as well. Well, well, Jack, you you actually had a really good description now on what's happening. US Treasury issuing a lot of debt. The marginal buyer of that debt finances in repo. At the moment, it's these guys who are financing it uh buying cash Treasuries, selling Treasury futures in their basis trade. And so, as long as the US as in this current configuration, as long as the fiscal deficit grows, there's going to be more demand for repo financing. Okay, demand continues to grow. What about the supply of funds? Well, we exhausted all the money market funds, and right now the marginal lenders are the commercial banks. And because repo rates are trading above interest on reserves, you have some commercial banks that are happily taking money that they have on deposit at Fed and lending it in repo instead.

[00:20:21] But there the amount of cash they have is is not unlimited. So, eventually, they're going to run out of cash, too. And so, repo rates will continue to go higher and maybe spike. If you're the Fed, you have to control short-term interest rates. So, that means you're committed to continuing to add liquidity into the financial system to keep these short-term interest rates under control. And that means you lose control of your balance sheet cuz by pitting rates, you you lose control over quantities. You That's just how this is set up here. So, that seems to be the game we've been in actually the past few years. We didn't see it. So, when the Fed first lost control over short-term interest rates in 2019, they added a whole bunch of uh reserves by buying by buying Treasury bills. And then we had 2020 where they just kind of threw in the kitchen sink and you know, increased the amount of liquidity in the financial system by by trillions. But we burned through all that. So, we're back to where we are in 2019 where

[00:21:22] you have to just keep adding, otherwise you'll lose control for short-term interest rates. So, that's kind of an interesting I think conundrum they have. They really have no way out of it uh because it is absolutely essential for a central bank to be able to control short-term interest rates. Yeah, just to underscore that point, like if the Federal Reserve cuts interest rates to zero on its statement, but actual interest rates in the market are still at 4%, then they have no control whatsoever. Like it they're basically that's like if you you or me on a podcast that interest rates are 0%. It's it's what's actually happens in the market. And you know, 99.9% of the time, the Federal Reserve has close to perfect control over these short-term interest rates, but you're starting to to see a discrepancy where those those interest rates are are going up. And I I have the the data from the New York Fed and from you that the the SOFR over the OBFR over overnight something you you can explain it is now 10 to 15 basis points wide. So, those repo rates are going up marginally. And interestingly, we're

[00:22:23] it's it's in the middle smack middle smack in the middle of the quarter. It's not like it's June 30th and all the banks are pulling out, you know, their their repo financing to make it look good for investors and and regulators for their quarterly reporting. This is, you know, there's no window dressing at all. Um and these these repo rates are going up a lot. Is Do you think this is what really drove the Federal Reserve to make this decision of boom, December 1 we are stopping quantitative tightening and also explain the framework. Powell talked about that framework. Um maybe it was Roberto Perli's thing. I know this from you. Talk about that that framework for reserve scarcity. Oh, yeah. I I think it's from Roberto. Roberto's a sole manager. So, Roberto or his team came up with a really interesting graph. I think it's like a hexagon or octagon or something like that that has different corners trying to measure out when liquidity in the financial system is scarce. So, he'll look at things like how sensitive is the Fed funds rate to changes in in reserves, how high are repo rates, uh let's say uh are are banks holding back their payments throughout the day trying to

[00:23:25] conserve liquidity? Uh is there increased uh let's say, you know, intraday deal intraday overdraft, things like that? Uh so, that's kind of the indicators to look at. But it looks like they looked at all those and decided that yes, indeed, repo rates trading far above IOR, that's not good. I don't want September of 2019 to re to reoccur again. So, I'm going to stop it uh in December 1st. So, that's the end of the balance sheet QT story for now. Jack, I think we've been through QE and QT before. This is like the entire cycle, right? So, we're right back uh back back back to where we were a few years ago, I guess. And do you think the Federal Reserve I think you already said yes. You I think you said the Federal Reserve is going to start expanding its balance sheet. My guess is that my guess is that they will have to. Otherwise, they'll lose control over the the repo market, and they don't want that to happen. So, I think what they misunderstand is that, you know, the repo rates rise not because reserves are scarce, but because you have a tremendous tremendous fiscal

[00:24:26] deficit that's financed in repo. And without paying attention to the demand side of that, uh you are going to uh be misled and end up in a situation where repo rates do once again spike like they did in 2019. And hopefully they'll realize that be again because it would be very embarrassing to make the same mistake twice. And how are they going to expand their balance sheet? Are they going to be themselves buying Treasuries, Treasuries? >> buy Treasury bills. So, a lot of people think that the Fed expanding their balance sheet is QE and easing, but that's not how the Fed looks at it. So, the Fed looks at QE in a specific way that they're taking duration out of the market. So, they're buying longer dated uh Treasury securities, so the private sector has less of a supply in longer dated Treasury securities putting downward pressure on interest rates. Now, from this perspective, when the Fed is buying Treasury bills, which are short dated, it's it's neutral. It's not having an impact on the market even though many people will perceive it as such.

[00:25:27] So, that's probably what they'll begin to do. I suspect they'll have to do it I I think in size, too, because if you look at how you look at a couple things. One is you look at the fiscal deficit. It's $2 trillion a year, roughly speaking. The second thing you want to look at is the growth in repo volumes. Now, SOFR volumes grew 800 billion a year. So, that's telling you that, you know, there's a tremendous demand for leverage repo financing. Where is that cash going to come from? So, it looks like you're probably going to be have to add Well, increase expand their balance sheet by a few hundred billion a year to be able to to meet all that demand. So, it's complicated because once you you let's say that you add liquidity in the system, someone lends it and and ends up into someone else's hands and maybe it can be lent again. So, how these thing these effects actually circulate and net out, it's hard to say. But it's definitely going to be I think in a few hundred billion range. And yeah, you've got this great chart from your most recent article on fedguy.com

[00:26:27] showing that secured overnight financing volumes SOFR has gone up from a trillion dollars in 2022 to 3 trillion dollars now. Wow. So, a good chunk of the deficit That's all Yeah, it's financed financed uh in the leverage hedge fund community. Uh Well, listen, those guys these guys, they're not just buying cash Treasuries for the heck of it, right? They they it's part of a spread trade or basis trade where they buy cash Treasuries and sell Treasury futures. So, Treasury futures are uh overvalued because a lot of the mutual funds, they want to have exposure to Treasuries, but they don't actually uh they don't actually want to go and have uh a repo a a repo loan and buy cash Treasuries. They'd rather just do it in futures. So, they buy futures. It's easier for them uh to manage that. And so, that leads to an overvaluation of Treasury futures relative to cash Treasuries, which leads which creates this trade where hedge fund can go and then sell these uh expensive Treasury futures

[00:27:28] on one hand and buy cash Treasuries on the other hand and see that basis converge. And Joseph, Powell today in in the October FOMC press conference said that they plan on holding the assets constant from December 1st effectively. Uh for but in terms of the liabilities, bank reserves are going to go down. So, the assets of commercial banks, the liability of the Fed, basically the money that the Federal Reserve owes, you know, commercial banks is going to go down, and that's going to be offset by an increase in other Federal Reserve liabilities, namely cash, you know, which we're all familiar with, you know, the thing that is is in wallets. And how do you think that is going to affect liquidity conditions? Cuz you know, presumably people are not buying Treasuries or securities with physical cash. I that's almost impossible. And you know, they commercial commercial banks are and bank reserves are what add liquidity and what are liquidity basically. So, um just explain the significance of of that comment. So,

[00:28:30] over time, uh people go when they So, the Fed if you have paper currency, that's a liability of the Fed. If you look at it, it says Federal Reserve note. The amount of paper currency I outstanding actually grows every year in line with the economy. Um strangely speaking, when you actually look at it, a lot of paper currency is actually held abroad outside of the US probably by, you know, cartels or people who want to avoid their their own their own monetary system. So, that that paper currency grows with the with the economy, roughly speaking. Where does How do you get that paper currency? Well, you go to a bank, right? So, let's say you have a deposit at a bank. You ask the bank say, "Hey, I have $100 on deposit at your bank. Give me $100 in currency." And where does the bank get that currency? Well, a bank gives the Fed $100 in reserve, and the bank and the Fed sends over an armored car to the bank with a $100 bill. And when you say that the the bank gives the Federal

[00:29:31] Reserve, what you mean is the bank asks the Fed, "Destroy this $100 of reserves that I have. Destroy it." Right? No, no. It's just like when we go to the commercial bank, like we take we have $100 in our checking account, and we take $100 out. Well, that $100 in our checking account, it's evaporated, it's erased, and I have a So, it's the exact same exact same mechanism and you know, over time, if the Fed keeps its balance sheet constant, because the demand for currency gradually increases, over time, you'll have fewer reserves and more currency as people just naturally go and ask for more currency with the expansion of the US economy. But again, that's is what he's saying. I continue to believe that he's going to have to add liquidity into the system to to control short-term interest rates. But, if I'm wrong, that's what that's what will play out. Now, we just slowly have fewer reserves as currency liabilities increase. And what's your current read of the stress in money market? Is it a drip drip,

[00:30:33] you know, very very slow thing or do you think there's a chance that things could get unhinged quite quickly? I remember, you know, just entering the business in in 2019 and I you first started studying and writing about that repo spike. I had, you know, almost no knowledge about it whatsoever, but I remember it kind of came out of nowhere. Do you What do you think is more likely that you're going to see a spike that's going to cause the Federal Reserve to intervene or is there going to the Federal Reserve intervention that you are predicting? Do you think What do you think Assessing the odds that that is going to be a proactive measure? >> So, I think one thing that's different today is that we do have a standing repo facility and so, if there really is an emergency need for cash, they can always go to the Fed. So, I think that makes huge spikes less likely. Um but the thing is, the repo market is mostly an overnight market. So, in the morning 7:00 a.m. it opens. If you are someone who wants to borrow money, you go and you call up your contacts and you ask them for money and

[00:31:33] they give it to you and usually you know each other. So, it's kind of a handshake deal. You know, set quantities and you know, prices are market prices. But, the thing is the people who lend cash, they don't actually have super great visibility as to how much cash they have available to lend. For example, let's say that you are a money market fund. You know, you know that on certain days your clients withdraw money. Maybe they want to do a big M&A deal. Maybe they have to pay taxes. You know, maybe you have less cash to lend. And if you're a commercial bank lending in the repo market, again, you are you have inflows and outflows. Sometimes you have more cash to lend than other times. So, the supply of cash after the RRP goes to zero, becomes a little bit more volatile. And from the demand side, you know, if you are let's say in a basis trader if you're financing a work inventory of securities, you got to get funded, right? So, you're borrowing short-term overnight and your liabilities are longer dated. So,

[00:32:34] you got to get financed no matter what. That inelastic demand is what creates the huge spikes because no matter what, you got to get financed. But, also note though that these are overnight loans. So, even if they spike significantly on an annualized basis, it's it's not that much money. Becomes a problem if it persists for a few days, but if it's just one day, it's it's tolerable. So, we had that repo spike to, you know, on an annualized basis absurd levels in September 2019. We now have the standing repo facility. Why haven't banks jumped in and started to use that standing repo facility? I have the overnight repurchase agreements, you know, now at $2 billion. So, $2 billion of the standing repo facility has been tapped. Why isn't it more if these disequilibria in in money markets are making themselves apparent? That's an interesting question. So, it is being used a lot more than it has in the past. Right? It used to be zero for a long time. Now, it's could be that banks are just not as comfortable as

[00:33:36] just borrowing from the Fed. It's possible that there could be some kind of stigma like borrowing from the discount window. I don't know. But, another possibility is that when you're borrowing from the Fed, you're using repo on a platform called triparty and in that platform, it's not nettable. So, if you are for example, if you're borrowing 10 billion and then lending it out to someone else at 10 10 billion to someone else, if it's a nettable, uh if it's a nettable transaction, then on your balance sheet, it doesn't increase its size, right? 10 billion in liabilities, 10 billion in assets, it nets to zero. So, that netting is kind of important because a lot of times, if you're part of a bank holding company, the size of your balance sheet incurs regulatory costs. But, if you're borrowing repo from the Fed, it's not nettable and so, you're expanding your balance sheet. That incurs regulatory costs and that has to be taken into account as well. So,

[00:34:37] that's a possibility as well. I'm sure the Fed is encouraging dealers to borrow more, but so far, it just hasn't been super effective in providing um I guess something of a self-ceiling for repo rates. So, the uh the the spread of 10 to 15 basis points of So, for over Fed funds over OBFR is not sufficient to uh induce dealers and banks to another people to tap the uh standing repo facility. You're you're going to have to see uh a bigger spike. Looks like that's how it is so far. So far, yeah. I I got you. Um All right. Well, let let's turn Joseph to the more vanilla more typical topics of just interest rate cuts. Um What was What was your take of of the meeting today? And I guess the significance of

[00:35:39] the Powell's comment that don't take it for granted that we're going to cut in December cuz the market was a little greedy coming into it. Nick Timiraos has the first question and said, you know, are you alarmed by the fact that the market has basically, you know, taken it uh you know, priced in so so many so many cuts. Yeah, he was being hawkish. Uh So, I think what he's really doing is being cautious. So, he doesn't want to commit to that December cut cuz he just doesn't know. He doesn't have any data. He doesn't know what's going on. And I think he looks at uh financial conditions, sees that they're loosening. I think he looks at those GDP now predictions. It looks like the economy's booming. I think he looks that and you know, looks at the labor market. It's not getting better, but it's not getting worse. Part of it could be just due to reduced labor supply. Last time he thought that, you know, we've had such a decoring decline in supply of labor that even zero jobs growth a month would be okay, would be at the break-even rate. So, I

[00:36:40] think he's looking at all this and saying I have no idea what's going to happen. I don't like all these cuts priced into the market because you know, maybe things are not as bad as I think they are. So, I think uh I think that's that's what happened there. So, really that it's a hard place to be in cuz you just don't know don't have the data to make good decisions. Right. And we had two dissents, one from Governor Miron who asked, "No, 25 basis points not enough. We should do 50." And then Schmidt who's bank president who's a voting member. Um he opted to not cut at all. So, he's a Fed president. He's been pretty hawkish and I think there's an interesting question. What happened to the Fed presidents who are supposed to be reappointed in in February? So, there was a question about that. One of the thinking was that, you know, if you have a more Trump-centered Board of Governors who could veto Fed president appointments, maybe they would just swap all the Fed presidents out with someone who is or people who are,

[00:37:41] you know, more pro rate cut. Doesn't look like that's happening so far, but yeah, he wanted to have no change in the policy rate. Governor Miron, as you mentioned, would like 50 basis point cuts and I think he's going to do that at each meeting, ask for 50 basis point cuts. And he has some interesting reasons why, right? He gave us good speech that clearly shows that you know, there's been a lot of changes in fiscal policy and other policies that make make it so that maybe the Fed can be a little bit more dovish. In the beginning of the year, Chair Powell was looking at everything that was happening with policy, with tariffs, with immigration, with regulation and so forth. And he if Chair Powell was like he shrugged his shoulders and said that I don't know what's going to happen. So, I'm just going to do nothing. Basically commit to being late. Governor Miron and Governor Bowman is actually thinking that, you know, that's not a good idea. I think we should be more forward-looking. And one of the things that Governor Miron has been saying is that since we have less immigration, that

[00:38:41] means less demand for shelter. That's going to put downward pressure on on on rents. That's disinflationary, right? And that's been playing out over the past few months in at the recent CPI report as well. So, if you take into account some of these policy changes, you could make an argument that rates should be lower, but again, it's very very difficult to uh to know how all these policies will play out, especially since they're changing all the time. Like the president is in Asia making all sorts of trade deals, encouraging more investment and so forth. Looks like he's going to have a summit with President Xi and looks like tariffs on China will come down. So, it is hard to make um forward-looking prognostics, but on the immigration side though, over the past few months, that's been very clear and it is also going to obviously have downward pressure on on rent. Right. And so, you said President Trump looks like he's going to meet with President Xi, lower tariffs on China. He said that he expects to lower the fentanyl tariff from potentially

[00:39:41] from 20% to 10%. There's so much uncertainty because only a few weeks ago earlier in October, Trump President Trump posted on Truth Social that President China is is not being very nice and that he's going to you know spike them to a huge level. So it's very very hard to interpret the future here. Um Governor Myron Eably's made the argument that the cocktail of lower immigration tariffs etc. is going to lead inflation to be lower therefore interest rates should be lower. So he's a dovish dissenter. And then of course there's the argument that tariffs and the the Trump policy the the one big beautiful bill is going to be inflationary. How where do you fall on that spectrum of the current Trump administration's policies? Are they are they inflationary and therefore you know the Fed should be hawkish? Are they disinflationary and therefore the Fed should be dovish? Are they both inflationary and disinflationary? I don't know how super complicated right? You put tariffs on obviously that's going to have some import in impact on prices.

[00:40:42] So far not a lot. You decrease the growth of population that's going to have some impact. It's going to put upward pressure on wages which I think is part of the reason why the president got elected but it's also going to put down pressure on things like shelter because housing is it's less not elastic right? So you can't suddenly build a whole bunch of housing. So once you have less population growth rents will come down. I'm looking at this other other let's say expensing for example OBIA does a lot of encouragement for people to build in America. Well that short term you're going to have more demand on real resources that's going to put prices up but if you do increase factories and so forth in the United States that increases supply going forward so that's disinflationary. So there's a whole lot of moving parts it's not easy to say and of course the president is doing something very interesting with international trade. He's basically confiscating the foreign reserves of allied countries and forcing them to take that money and build factories in the United States instead of buying treasuries. So you know maybe that will

[00:41:43] also have a increased in supply in the coming years. So I think the big picture is that they are trying to increase supply and get uh and get inflation lower but in the short term though we might might not see that impact. Thank you. Joseph how are you thinking about the stock market right now? Obviously we're in a huge bubble right? >> [laughter] >> You will? Yeah obviously I mean things only go up everything goes up. So when I look at the stock market I it kind of reminds me as to how gold traded the past few weeks right? You go into a period where you just go straight up straight up straight up looks like you're going parabolic and then suddenly you decline. So I feel like when I look at the markets we're entering this phase with it seems like it stocks only go up. I've noticed that when we have bad data oh that means rate cuts market go up. If we have good data that means the economy's good market go up and there's a lot of people pouring in here just chasing momentum. They have a lot of different narratives

[00:42:44] but at the end of the day you know people are just buying because the market goes up and it's been working very well and I I think feel like when you're in this phase in the market you can it's hard to say how high you can go. You know maybe you really just follow the dot com blueprint and go higher than anyone imagined but at the end of the day though it's most likely followed by a sharp decline and that worries me a little bit because so much of the economy is dependent upon the wealth effect. If we do actually go have some kind of blow off top and afterwards we have a decline that almost guarantees us to be in a recession and not just that I think from a there's so many people who are basically just spending their day just buying stuff in the market right? I go to a cafe I see this nice old man sit down open his laptop I think he's looking at photos of his grandkids but actually he's you know he's drawing candles and trying to figure out well you know when to buy when to sell. So it's really very much a speculation nation here and usually speaking most of these guys they

[00:43:45] lose money and I think that's going to upset a lot of people. So uh I understand the president likes the stock market higher likes to claim credit when it goes higher it's definitely making people like him but you know if you take credit on the way up you will get blamed on the way down so that may not be super wise. And Joseph you noted for for being a giant bull on on the equity market throughout 2023 and 2024 um primarily for reasons of just very very strong earnings growth and GDP growth consumption as well as declining inflation all of which has been proven right. How much of it do you think is just the earnings growth is really Nvidia as well as other companies that benefit from AI capital expenditure you know most of that money being spent by extremely large companies Meta Amazon you know Microsoft the list goes on open AI which is not publicly traded but may may IPO in 2027 who knows and you know

[00:44:48] with the exception of open AI these are very very profitable companies and so just you know the profits and the profit expectations for Nvidia just keeps on going up. Nvidia is now a five trillion dollar company and you know Joseph you could be right the other bears you know could be right obviously you you're not having been a bear throughout all this but you know recently I guess sounds like you're a little more bearish on the economy on tariffs but it's just that doesn't matter. You're right on the wrong issues and AI cap ex just continues to the moon until it eventually goes down and implodes but you know you can call a bubble and be right three years later but that's not that's not the same as being right. Do you know you Well Joseph I want to be totally clear that I have not been on Mark with the equity market this year. My call on equity market I've been bare most of the year worked really well until until the president posted that we should buy stocks and then it did not work out well. So no it um so I've not been doing well not have a good call on the equity market this year. So keep that in mind as I say this. Now

[00:45:52] the companies have been spending a lot on cap ex and the market has perceived that as positive but at the end of the day you have all these companies that are generating a lot of cash they used to give it back to their shareholders through buybacks now they just basically burn it on investments that you know may or may not pay off and you know a lot of reports suggest that the AI stuff super cool doesn't seem really to be making money so far and doesn't seem to have a clear path to do so. So I that kind of I think that kind of speaks to the market sentiment. Whereas I feel like if the market could easily perceive these investments as being a waste of money and penalize other companies for it today they're perceived as you know everything is great. You know you have all these daisy chains of investments and so forth. So I think it's really just sentiment and momentum. I I wouldn't really read anything more into it. Everyone has a good narrative as to why they buy something but at the end of the day you know it goes up you feel good and you buy more. And how are you thinking about

[00:46:52] foreign ownership of equities as well as the valuation of the dollar this you know view and theory that tariffs would spark a sell off in US assets both treasuries as well as stocks. You know the world the rest of the world owns a lot of US assets as you know you know that theory hasn't really played out yet you've seen an increased hedging amount but in terms of you know the the Iceland Norway selling Nvidia they really haven't. They've they've been buying more Nvidia and they've been doing dollar swaps and hedging off that currency risk but have they been selling Nvidia? No. No no they sold I think in one month or two months and then they came back in size. They they just can't get enough of that stuff. I was I was speaking with some of the foreign investors and they felt that you know US tech is the place to be and you can see that in the five trillion dollar market cap of Nvidia. Now that kind of surprises me really so we have this administration that's you know doing a lot of things that if you were foreigner I feel like you would be a little bit >> [sighs] >> a little bit more cautious but what I do think this means to me though

[00:47:54] is that when the downturn does come I think you would be very non linear. So you kind of have this built in dollar exposure built into the to the market that is I think very very large and could potentially mean the downside could be larger than it would usually be because let's say that we do have real recession and so we have a tumble the market. Okay then that would mean the Fed will cut rates rapidly and that would mean the dollar would depreciate maybe a lot. You know that's a that's a recipe for disaster for a foreign investor because you're losing as the stock price goes down and you'll lose as the dollar depreciates as well. So you you definitely need to get out and because there's such large foreign exposure to the US equity markets that decline could be significant. So I think this is one of the mechanisms going forward that if we do have a blow off top that actually leads to a sharp decline could accelerate that to be something that that that's quite deep. So it's

[00:48:55] just another mechanism in the market that I think we should be aware of. Well Joseph I guess let's just talk about this issue of Federal Reserve independence. You know President Trump is appointing people who are going to be calling for interest rate reductions which the president wants. That would be a Federal Reserve that is no longer independent that is a strong influence by by the executive branch by by government and you know President Trump himself has said I think I should have a say about interest rates. That's kind of declaring that he doesn't believe in central bank independence. That's my interpretation. A lot of people number one do you think that that is a departure from central bank independence? Number two do you think that that is a bad thing which you know, I'd say a lot of economists think is a bad thing. So obviously the president would like to set interest rates. What president doesn't, right? So I'll say this about central bank independence. Now, I think central bank independence can be a really good thing because we are in a political process where you know, the executive would always like to have lower interest rates

[00:49:56] to temporarily boost the economy. And we've seen that happen with Nixon for example, trying to get lower interest rates, boost his chances in the election. And then afterwards, you know, maybe we have inflation, but hey, I'm not up for re-election anymore. So I think that's the fear there. But that tells you one thing very clearly and that a central bank is never really independent. It's always operates under the elected government. So we've had an independent central bank in the US since the 1950s and yet we did have that episode happen with Nixon and we have this episode happening right now. So central bank is composed of people and they always operate under political constraints. So that's one thing. But more broadly speaking though if you look across the world, so let's say that you have central bank independence in the UK and France, they didn't get that until the 1990s. And it wasn't because they had a whole bunch of inflation and finally the legislators said we can't take this anymore. We got to give our central bank

[00:50:57] independence. It was they were having you know, low inflation leading up to the independence and they just decided to change the system probably just to you know, get in line with what other people are doing. So even without central bank independence, you can still have low inflation and you can even look across the world to China which has a you know, very complicated managed economy. They don't have central bank independence and they still have low inflation. So you can have a central bank independence and still get inflation and you can not have an independent central bank and have low inflation. So it's not necessary and it's not sufficient. Now, this is but the last point that I'm going to make is I think is more important. And that the central banks today are very different from the central banks in the past. Today the Fed is super super powerful, much more powerful than the central bank has ever been. You not have only have interest rate policy, you have balance sheet policy where you can go and buy you know, trillions of mortgage backed securities, get mortgage rates super

[00:51:59] low, make you know, a whole generation of people locked out of the housing market today. And of course you also have regulatory power over banks. Whereas you can control who gets access to credit. You know, maybe in some countries they can do this. Make sure that loans are given to green endeavors for example. So a central bank today is super super powerful. Although the Federal Reserve has abandoned that, I should know, right? Yes, but you know, I'm just talking about central the Fed as an example. So the ECB also super powerful. So central banks in general today are much more powerful than they are in the past. And when you look at the political issues today as a society the one of the most pressing ones is like home ownership, right? A whole bunch of people can't afford homes because a whole bunch of people well, home prices have gone up in part because mortgage rates are low. And of course it's wealth inequality. People who own financial assets, well, they're doing pretty well. We have this K-shaped economy. So some of the most important distributional things in our society are

[00:53:01] basically determined by a a a small group of people sitting at the central bank. So if you believe that we should have a democratic society it seems to me that it makes sense for the public to have some say in matters that have huge distributional impacts on the society. So you can make the argument that because central banks today are much more powerful than in the past they have to be less independent or you could pare them down, maybe separate regulatory power out, maybe make them single mandate inflation only and so forth. So uh yeah, I think you can make a good argument that uh central bank is too powerful to not have any kind of democratic say simply, you know. So I think that's an argument you can make and it's so it's not super unreasonable for for my perspective uh for you to say that uh maybe the Fed shouldn't be independent. And I understand that um you know, it's a it's a policy decision, right? There are there are pluses and minuses. It's

[00:54:03] not just oh my god we have independent central bank. These guys would be so wise and smart and everything would be okay. That's just not how the world works. Joseph, this near consensus among economists that central bank independence is good and necessary to have stable prices and not have runaway inflation have you always disagreed with that or you has that been a process and you you know, if so you tell us about that process. So what you read in textbooks is what you're what you're saying Jack and one of the things that I have come to realize in my life is that uh a lot of the things you read in textbooks sound reasonable but are not actually true. And they're basically the work of very high IQ people but who don't have a lot of direct experience. So that sounds totally reasonable but it's just just not true and I've well, we've talked about many examples why that's just not true. Uh one thing I'll note is that

[00:55:05] inflation is unpopular. So you have other checks on inflation and that's a democratic process. One of the reasons why President Biden was not succe- okay. Vice President Harris was not successful in the last election was because inflation was too high. So boom, you have you mismanage the economy, inflation was too high, you got kicked out of office. That works. Right? And I mean it works in Argentina as well. Inflation too high, you have this guy with a chainsaw going on and cutting things. So you have this democratic accountability there as well. So that's another thing to keep in mind. It's just not about the central bank. And one other thing is that inflation is a complicated thing. Uh so at the high level it's when demand pushes against supply. But it's not demand and supply are not all about interest rates, right? We've seen over the past few years that interest rates went up to you know, multi-decade highs but because of all the fiscal spending, it just didn't work. And because of um you know, COVID and things like that,

[00:56:06] supply chain stuff, inflation was high. So it's not all about interest rates. So it doesn't really make sense to give inflation uh just to one organization who does not have the tools to carry it out. Now, a lot of the research that people cite in saying that central banks have better outcomes for inflation, blah blah blah, a lot of that was done during the great moderation when we had China entering into the global stage. Now, the central banks were doing their thing and inflation came down to 2% and they kind of patted themselves on the back being like, my gosh I convinced everyone inflation expectations stable and got inflation down. It's all me. So you got to give uh central bank independence. But on the other hand, you had literally several hundred million people enter the global labor force with the China entering WTO. I'd say that had a pretty big impact on on inflation as well. So you have all these things that determine inflation that are definitely far more than interest rates. So to think that you could that's an interest rates and inflation

[00:57:06] to be under control. I don't think that's how the world works. For for the sake of argument I'll just you know, push back a little bit which is that you were correct when you said or you basically implied that the you know, this whole central bank independence thing is a very new thing. 1980s and other countries 1990s. I'd say you're correct. But I'll say you know, the era where we had you know, runaway inflation where we didn't have central bank independence was the 1970s and you know, that whole oh, Richard Nixon just let interest rates go up you know, he he asked interest rates to to not go up too much. Isn't it a lot of lesson from the 1970s that that ran amok? And I I would also make the argument that you know, pre-1971 the US was on the gold standard and the rest of the world was also constrained to a lesser degree because they were on the dollar standard at the Bretton Woods system. And then of course you know, we were on the gold standard uh in in the 1920s and then you know, going going back there's been various metallic standards that were constraining the amount of basically you know, the printed this let let the central banks have interest rates wherever they want

[00:58:07] and let the government set set interest rates. That that is a you know, often been accompanied by monetary instability. So just what do you make about about that argument? >> You're right. There's a different regime back then and it's and it's difficult because of all the uh differences in the system. But you don't have to go back that far. You can just go back let's say 4 years. >> [snorts] >> We have independent central banks across the Western world, inflation to the moon. Or you can go back to today. Inflation's at 3% and has been for some time. We have independent central banks, right? So you know, it's not it's not all about that. You have um a lot of other factors that have have to uh that matter as well. That's true. Uh what if Joe Biden during 2022 was you know, tweeting and saying that J. Powell is out of control raising interest rates from 50 basis points to 125 basis points. Maybe I'm thinking about firing him. You know, would would that have been a good

[00:59:09] thing clearly the Federal Reserve raising interest rates in 2022 was you know, not just good and necessary but like probably overdue. Um you know, would you have uh you know, supported President Biden just stopping Fed rate cuts or as well? In 2022 seems like inflation was pretty high. So it I think that was the right thing to do and I think they did have political support to to do that at that time. Um but again, inflation is not all about rate cut rates. And also, the central bank always operates within the political constraints. And at the end of the day, when inflation was out of control, the elected government lost and we got replaced. So, there was democratic accountability as well. So, it worked. Um Um so, I wouldn't be too worried about about um uh the Fed losing independence. It probably will. It looks like we're in that kind of political era, but uh it doesn't mean that we'll go into hyperinflation, right? A lot of people

[01:00:10] point out that, "Oh my god, we'll begin We'll end up like Erdogan." That's an extreme example, right? Remember, we've uh countries have been under uh politically controlled central banks for a long time and things were okay. So, that's not the only outcome. I think that's very obvious fearmongering. Yeah, I mean, hyperinflation means 50% inflation or 50,000% inflation. Uh I I just think that in the United States that is is very unlikely. Just to to put put my views on there. So, Joseph, the price of gold has been rallying like crazy despite uh the recent pullback over the past, let's say, 10 days. Um a lot of people attribute the surge in gold to fears of central bank independence and basically the Federal Reserve is is is cutting uh cutting rates. How are you thinking about precious metals? Uh and and yeah, what what's your outlook on it and its potential relationship with with the Fed? It's just momentum like everything else. So, there's a property of a thing like you got debasement, right? So, what does that mean for fiat currency? Debasement is

[01:01:12] means your money is worth less than it was before. That's inflation, right? So, debasement 100% happening. Got a $2 trillion deficit. Got inflation was 2%, now it's 3%. So, your money your fiat money being debased. No doubt about it. Does that mean gold has to go to the moon? 10,000, 100,000? Uh that's up to you to decide. So, the debasement trade and all these things there I think I think of it as just momentum like everything else like we see in Bitcoin like we see in AI stocks like we see in uranium stocks and so forth. A bunch of people just buying something that works, making a lot of money, and then when it collapses, move on onto the next thing. So, I wouldn't read too much in these macro narratives. I think we just have a class of investors who understand now that basically everything is like an NFT. You buy it, it goes up, you squeeze it and it goes up, and then you try to go to the next thing. Right. And gold has no real intrinsic value in terms of trying to value it. So, there's no reason for it can't go to 10,000, no reason it can't go to 2,000

[01:02:12] or or or lower um as opposed to stocks that, you know, theoretically have a valuation anchor. What is Well, let's put Palantir is trading at like 600 PE. So, I'm not surely I'm not sure that really matters either. Yeah, yeah, fair fair point. Um Joseph, um closing closing thought for you is, you know, in preparing for this interview, I you read your most recent pieces on fedguy.com. They are just so good. I mean, you're such a good writer obviously such a smart thinker and good writer, but in particular, there's no fluff in your pieces and it's it's amazing. Like I guess only like some like novels and literary authors who are famous for this quality is is where I see such a an economy of words. Uh so, I just want to give you a shout-out there. Your most recent uh your your penultimate piece uh I think one Wells Fargo was interesting. Just share your views on the overall commercial banking sector as well as this thing that you talked about uh with swap spreads. So, not so far, but uh you interest rate swaps uh have been negative. So, b- basically swaps are a lower interest

[01:03:15] rate than Treasuries, but they have been getting less negative and you attributed this to Wells Fargo Fargo's asset cap being being lifted. Explain just your thoughts on on this issue as well as just your overall uh outlook of of commercial banking in in this context. You know, which which have most of the big ones have have have reported earnings so far. So, based on the recent earnings of the big commercial banks and the big regional ones as well, the US economy is doing fine. I mean, if uh JP Morgan asked about the state of US consumer, flat out and said the US consumer is fine. So, everything seems to be okay and these big banks, they have a lot of information about the economy cuz everyone has accounts there. They see your credit card spending and so forth. So, they have the absolute best data and they think the consumer is fine. And with regard to credit concerns, we see that reported in the market as well. If you look at the loan loss reserves the banks hold, delinquencies, they're all fine as well. >> [clears throat] >> Excuse me. Uh they're they've actually improved over over a quarter sequentially. So, from their

[01:04:15] perspective, the US economy is good and I think that's the key takeaway from bank earnings reports. Now, with respect to the other stuff, you know, Wells Fargo had an asset cap on them. Wells Fargo is one of the largest banks in the US. Also, they have a sophisticated markets practice. So, when you have an asset cap on you, you kind of limits your ability to do new businesses. Once that cap was removed, uh they actually grew their markets business by about $100 billion and 50 billion of that seems to be increasing lending and repo. 50 billion seems to be in higher inventory of securities. Now, what that means is that you kind of have the pipes in the financial system are wider and so that helps get cash to where it is. That that narrow spreads and you you can see that I think a little bit in how quickly the RPO was emptied. So, now you can have uh money market funds instead of lending to the RPO, they lend to Wells Fargo who then lends to someone else. So, the pipes are wider and the swap spreads are

[01:05:16] also less negative. There's a lot of things driving that, but one of the things I think contributed to that is that there is more balance sheet capacity available throughout the broader financial system because Wells Fargo, one of the largest banks in the US, uh had its asset cap removed. So, that was a smart thing uh the the Federal Reserve and other regulators did and I think we're going to see more of that as they try to deregulate the bank um reduce regulations on bank sector, reduce capital requirements. So, that that is a a bullish thing for the US economy, but it's going to play out slowly and gradually. Joseph, you got this phenomenal chart uh on an issue I've actually, you know, been pleased to cover a lot on monetary matters. The commercial bank loans to non-bank financial institutions. A a huge amount of loans, commercial and industrial loans that banks were making actually, you know, disappeared overnight cuz they were reclassified as loans to non-banks. So, the old model of a bank lends to a company or a industrial facility, factory, that's kind of out the window. Now, the bank is lending to

[01:06:17] a a private credit company or a business development company. Uh and then those companies make the loans. So, the banks you could say is de-risked. It has a more senior position. But uh you know, increasingly banks are are not really lending to the economy um and I was actually at a conference. So, you know, this data is recent that uh like 90% of bank loans are to non-bank uh financial institutions or non-depository financial institutions. Uh what do you think is the significance of this and do you think it makes in any way the Federal Reserve's job harder? No, it makes the Federal Reserve's jobs much easier because it de-risks the banking sector. In the past, you you if you were a bank, you would lend to a company and, you know, you'd have some risk there. Now, what you do if you're a bank, you lend to a a private credit fund or some kind of private investor. They're usually teams of people from very highly regarded companies. So, you know, your big asset managers like a like a BlackRock or or something like that. And then those guys then take the money and they lend to other companies. So, let's say that the company has a default, uh

[01:07:19] what happens? Well, the private credit lender deals with it. And when the private credit com- fund has uh exhausted their resources, then it becomes the bank's problem. So, the bank has this extra layer between them and the ultimate borrower that insulates them from credit risk and that's the reason why they do it because it's uh from a because there's less risk, the it's cheaper. There's less it costs the bank less capital uh to make that loan uh to the NBFI than it is to the ultimate borrower. So, we have this basically this shadow banking sector that gets its financing from the commercial banking sector and then lends it to the real economy. So, it makes the Fed's job more difficult in that it doesn't really know where the money goes, but it makes the banking system safer and I think that's really what the Fed cares about uh because when the banking system fails, you know, that affects everyone. When you have some private credit fund in the shadows that fails, you know, that they're not tradeable. So, they don't really cause panic in the market and also, no one has deposits there. I mean,

[01:08:21] they borrow from wealthy individuals and so forth, but it's not like a systemic event that impacts the broader public. Yeah, when when you describe it, it sounds like nothing can go wrong and I understand the argument. But often, Joseph, as as you know, what causes financial crises is are not um risky things. It's things that seem very safe. Like mortgages, you know, all the analysis going to subprime mortgages was correct that like during a recession, housing prices never go down and everyone pays back off their loans. And but that, you know, then you might have an obvious credit bubble. So, it kind of seems like everything you said is correct, but because it's so safe and so great, it's going to keep on happening and happening until it gets to wretched excesses to to use a uh Charlie Mungerism. Well, it's not safe. It's just that the risk is borne by people that is not is not borne by the public. Like if you were if it was borne by the commercial banks, at the end of the day, the government has to go bail them out because banks are too big to fail. Uh but your private credit funds, your your big financial sponsors, those guys, they're not too big to fail. They can go

[01:09:23] bust. And so, uh I I it's just placing risk, uh, away from the public. And maybe that will align the symptoms a little bit. Because let's say that you are a big GSIB, you know, you can do whatever, government will bail you out. So, that's a bad incentive. But you if you move that risk to the, uh, the private financial companies, they won't get bailed out. At least I don't think. Maybe the Trump administration is different. Uh, maybe that makes them make their incentives more aligned with, uh, with their with just being more prudent with their risk. So, right now it does seem like there are people worried about what's happening in the private credit space. If you look at the publicly traded private credit funds, they're called BDCs. They've been taking a big haircut on their price. >> [gasps] >> So, uh, it does seem like there's some, uh, concern over there. But again, if a if a private fund goes bust, it's not systemic. It's mostly money from wealthy

[01:10:23] institutions and rich people, and they can bear the losses. Yes. I I've, um, you actually some of these BDCs, I think the the sell-off might be overblown. You know, what do I know? But in particular, it's these, uh, so non-publicly traded, uh, BDCs like private credit funds that I I don't want to say I have concerns over. I just have questions over them. Like, you know, some of these yields I've seen actually this is in BDCs are 15%, 14%, 16%. Like, if you you don't get that risk you that money, uh, risk-free. And I think these are kind of being marketed to investors, a broader swath of investors who are maybe less sophisticated. You know, Yale and Harvard used to be allocating to them. Now they maybe tapped out. Now they're going to wealth managers and all all the types of people. And you know, maybe it is going to be impacting people. Also, Joseph, a selling point of these things were that they're unlevered or it used to be we use almost no leverage. The BDCs are levered, but the the private credit funds were not levered anymore. Now they are being levered. Like banks are lending to private credit funds. So, the leverage is increasing. The equity is coming less from institutional investors, more from

[01:11:23] retail or, you know, retailish people investors. It is becoming more levered. I think the cycle is aging. Again, I don't want to, you know, say say portray just a doom and gloom narrative, but just, you know, just want to give, uh, the the full perspective. Yeah. Good perspective. Yeah. Um, all right, Joseph, can you just give us just a a brief overview of where do you think the the what do you what do you what are you going to be tracking for the Federal Reserve over the coming weeks and months? I think the trend this year is less about the Fed, more about what happens with the White House and the AI companies. So, unfortunately, as a Fed watcher, it's just not that important. But if you were to focus on the Fed, it would be about the ultimate composition of the Fed's balance sheet, whether or not they really will significantly shorten their duration, and how quickly will they get there? Will they actually sell securities to get to their final composition? That's what I would be looking for in the next few months. Hm. Oh, that makes sense. And just just just a final question. How tightly correlated are the level of

[01:12:25] bank reserves, but in particular the minute stresses of a few basis points here, a few basis points there in terms of SOFR spreads going up, in terms of swap spreads going up, whatever. Uh, how correlated is that with true financial stress of credit spreads going up and the stock market going down? Like I don't believe they're correlated at all. It's just a tiny tiny It's a huge market, very important, but also very obscure. Uh, so I don't really think it I mean if you look at what happened in September 2019, it didn't really affect the broader market at all. So, it's just kind of too niche, too in the weeds. But at the end of the day, it's essential from the Fed's perspective. And so, the Fed will also always step in and build that market out. So, I don't think it's anything to worry about. All right, Joseph, well, we'll leave it there. Um, people can find you on Fedguy12. Your your excellent writing is at fedguy.com. And I'll also say, Joseph, that next week, so very early November, I will be interviewing a very high-profile guest. Uh, and I by very

[01:13:28] high-profile I mean very very important. So, a true VIP. Definitely the most powerful and influential person, uh, who I've ever interviewed on my show Monetary Matters and my previous show for for guidance in my entire career. And, uh, so people should stay tuned to Monetary Matters in early November. They will want to be paying attention. This is not one you want to miss. And I know who it is, and Jack, he's not overselling it. It is someone you don't want to miss. Thank you, Joseph. This will obviously air on, uh, Monetary Matters Apple Podcast, Spotify, and YouTube. Subscribe to all of that. Leave a rating and review. On Spotify, we now have video, so we'll put up a few of Joseph's charts from fedguy.com. So, Spotify listeners can now see that as well. And we'll also, uh, be sharing this with Joseph. So, this will go live on Joseph Wang's YouTube channel >> [laughter] >> where he has his weekly updates which which are, uh, very very, uh, valuable and good as well. Thank you everyone for listening, and thanks again, Joseph. Thanks, Jack.
