[00:00:00] So the bubbles are going to be more likely to be showing up in those sections. Many of those companies are still private. The people are going to be holding the bag. It's going to be the VCs. So by itself, you say Chachi PT Open AM and you need 234 trillion in revenues eventually in this business to justify this much being invested up front in the LLMs themselves. As an investor, you're going to get eaten alive if you go into that space and bring your valuation to justify what you do cuz God help you. If you're going to make an argument for a bubble, it's got to be based on something that I'm not seeing in the numbers. When the correction to the big bubble happens and people look back, they're going to start writing off. There's going a lot of impairments of AI investments. But guess what? Nvidia will not be asked to return the cash they got in the chips, right? Because that's been spent already. Later on, you'll hear more about the Fundrise Income Fund and why sophisticated investors are turning to higher yielding assets like private credit. But for now, let's get into today's interview. Very happy today to be joined by Professor Oswalt Deodorin, finance professor at the New York University Stern School of Business. Professor, it is wonderful to be speaking to you here today. I want to

[00:01:01] ask you about the valuation. How are you assessing the valuation, whether it's fair, under, or overvalued of US? >> What do you mean by the valuation? The valuation of what? >> The S&P 500. It's a richly priced market which is building an expectations that the pathway is going to be a benign one in terms of the economy and how companies react to it. So it's no different than it was at the start of last year. What I said at the start of last year is if to the extent that the market is right, you're going to be able to see the numbers delivered. The challenges there are lots of things on the horizon that could potentially trip up the market. political, economic, war, and those things don't seem to get get be priced in. And so far, the market's been right. You know, it it kind of blew off the tariffs after an initial shock. And in hindsight, it turns out that the economy didn't collapse. Inflation didn't come back. So, so far at least, the market has been right in its benign stance, but it's pricing in more benign

[00:02:03] circumstances. >> Is there a big market delusion in NI? >> There always is. It's a given, right? Anytime you have a big disruption cuz think of what drives a big market delusion it's human nature you see big market you're an ambitious smart young person or even older person what do you think I want to be part of that big market that's the entrepreneur mindset so you start a business you go raise capital who do you raise it from venture capitalists and there's a selection bias they listen to your story the venture capitalists like your story put money in so you've created a pod of overconfident people looking at a big market thinking they can conquer the market. If this pod values itself, overconfidence is going to show up as overestimated revenues and growth and cash flows and over. So the it's almost it it's a feature of big change is you will get the big market delusion. Too many businesses started going after a big market individually. Some of those companies are going to become great companies or winners but

[00:03:03] collectively these companies are going to be priced too high. So, it happened with the PC business in the 80s, with the internet in the '9s, with social media in the last decade, and now it's happening with AI. And what will it mean? There will be a correction along the way. Does this mean that if you sell short on AI stocks, you're going to come out ahead? Not necessarily, because a few of them are going to be the big winners, but collectively there's going to be a cleaning up phase. And that's coming. And I think it's healthy when it comes because it is how we change as human beings. we overreach and then we correct. So there is a big market delusion. There will be a correction as a consequence. But I don't I think that's part of being in a market. That's how you let markets create change. >> There's there's almost there's almost always a big market delusion in every big market >> because human beings are over optimistic. They're the ones who go after it. So it's human nature to overreach. In fact, one of the expressions I use in my class when people complain about bubbles and overconfident entrepreneurs is I ask

[00:04:04] them the question, would you want to live in a world run by actuaries? [sighs] I'll tell you what that world would look like. Would still be in caves because actuaries base everything on expected values, probabilities, and they're saying this fire thing, it could get out of control. So, let's make sure we have all the numbers we need before we leave the game. Thank God we weren't run by actuaries, right? For change to happen in economies, you need people to overreach. The consequence of that is you're going to have market bubbles and market corrections. They're a feature, not a bug. You want to have a market with no bubbles, fine. But that market is going to create no innovation. there's going to be no big change that happens because you need chaos almost as a feature of markets for this kind of change to happen on the spectrum of an extreme big market delusion to a minor one. Where would you place AI and could

[00:05:04] we divide that perhaps into the public markets where the the revenue growth and the earnings growth looks very good particularly for Nvidia but also the hypers scale companies? And no, wait, that's not true. That's the architecture of AI, right? >> That business is going to that's like Cisco was the first company with the com boom. So that's actually the easy part. You're building the architecture and people are spending a lot. So if you're thinking about Nvidia, you're think about the data centers, the power companies, constellation energy, you are on the easy half of the equation, which is the AI architecture is getting built. There's no uncertainty there that people are spending money, it's going to show up. The uncertainty is so this is the cost of building the factory. You know what we're uncertain about? What product that factory will produce and whether anybody will buy the product. That's where the delusions are forming. Not in the architecture side but in the product and service side. Companies that think they can create a product that people will want. They don't even know whether there's a demand for it and are creating

[00:06:05] businesses around this and attracting capital to get in those businesses. That's where you're going to see that's why I think you're going to more likely see a big market delusion with the LLMs than you are with the architecture true architecture companies because collectively if you think about what what LLMs do there's really you know if you look at Chat GPT or Grock or Gemini or Claude by itself it's not a money-making device. You can charge a a subscription but it's not going to be enough to cover the huge cost. You've got to figure out a way to make this a commodity that other companies need to produce products and services for customers. And that's the challenge. That's the part that's unknown. And that's where I think people are overreaching because they think they can pull off stuff that I don't think on an expected basis they can pull off. So the bubbles are going to be more likely to be showing up in those sections. Many of those companies are still private, [snorts] right? So the people are going to be holding the bag. It's going to be the VCs in that space who are making these

[00:07:07] bets right now on those companies. >> And rough numbers, open AI has raised at a $500 billion valuation is rumored to attempt to be raising close to a trillion 850 billion. Their uh annual uh run rate of their, you know, their current revenue annualized is 20 billion. Estimates 2026 of 30 billion. So that's close to a 30 times forward price of sales. You know, you you also, you know, have the numbers of Anthropic and XAI. When you look at those numbers, what are you thinking? >> Collectively, they're overvalued. It's it's a there will be a winner coming out of the space who might be worth what you're investing in right now, but if you took those companies collectively and you put your money on them, there's going to be a correction in that collective space. There isn't enough revenue in the endgame to justify this kind of pricing for what is essentially part of the architecture. The LLM are part of the architecture. They're not a

[00:08:08] product of service by themselves. So, collectively, I think they're overvalued. >> Tell me what you mean when you said they're not a product by itself because okay, a very elevated multiple. You can perhaps justify that if you're going to get a world where it turns into a Google, it turns into a meta, it turns into these. >> No, but remember Ge Google uses Gemini and it's advertising. It might get revenues to the advertising business, right? That's what I mean about a product use. That's one place where an LLM is being used to actually generate revenues. So, think of that as what I mean by the end revenue stream. Other companies will have to license I don't know what the exact business model will be. licensed chat GPT as a vehicle not to sell sad chat GPT but as a vehicle for products and services that they will then sell their customers based on that cha chat GPT you know the the the foundation so by itself you say chat GPT open as I said there's a small subscription model you

[00:09:09] can build upon them but it's not going to be $2 trillion and you need 234 trillion in revenues eventually in this business to justify this much being invested upfront in the LLMs themselves. >> And then perhaps on top of that, even if the, you know, it met your revenue test, it might not meet the profit test because it's so subsidized and the margins are so low. On that one, I'm I'm I'm a little more upbeat because the nature of these businesses seems to be winner take all businesses, which is if the revenues are that much, it'll end up with three or four companies dominating that space. And given the history of what technology dominance has look like, those companies are going to deliver margins like the Metas and the Googles in whatever space they operate. So, I think the revenue part is actually the tougher part. the margin part might be more accomp might be easier to accomplish because of the winner take all networking component to how these

[00:10:11] these company we don't know that yet but that would be my prior is it's going to look more like a technology business than it is going to look like the oldtime manufacturing business more concentrated three or four players in each game all of whom can you know can collect big margins because there's really no outside competition >> what are the network effects for the large language models for for Mastercard Visa it's that everyone uses them for Meta it's that you know no one wants to go on a social media app that was there are no users you your friends aren't on there for the opens and and its competitors what what is that >> right now none right right now none because we're using them in a very casual way I use chat GPT to summarize a letter I could ask grock to do it Gemini to do it that's why I said this is the early stage in the process in the commercial phase it won't be chat GPT you'll be using it'll be a product that comes out of chat GPT a service that comes out of chat GPT so you as a consumer the person buying the product or service are not interacting with chat GPT you're interacting with the company

[00:11:14] that use chat GPT to deliver this product or service to you that's where the dominance comes in is because those companies will create their own versions of you know networking benefits which means if you're not on the platform that they've created you will not be able to get those benefits. I mean, think about it now. Smartphone the the the Apple iPhone is should be getting 40% of the revenues for for that Door Dash makes every year if in if this were a fair word because you have a bunch of businesses that are built on the smartphone. So, Door Dash, Airbnb, you can argue that all of these businesses would be much smaller and much less successful without the smartphone operating as the delivery mechanism. That's what I mean by LLM. LLMs will be like the smartphone in the Door Dash business. You're not dealing with your smartphone, you're dealing with Door Dash. The networking benefits come from what Door Dash and Airbnb create in

[00:12:15] their platform. And that's what I think will be the endgame in the product or service business that you see coming out of AI. And I think you know we have to wait to see how big that business is. But it's going to be tough to sustain how much we're investing up front in AI. >> So you said open AAI and its competitors anthropic XAI are overvalued. How much overvalued are they and what valuation would make sense if if 350 billion doesn't make sense for Enthropic? 500 or 850 billion doesn't make sense for open AI. What does make sense to you >> at this point? Who cares, right? None of them are public yet. There are VCs who can only be long, they can't go short. So your decision is should I invest or not invest and basically collective overvaluation means unless you have some technological expertise that allows you to pre-identify which of these LLM is going to end up the winner. this is a space you should stay away from. Once they go public, the

[00:13:16] decision will get a little more concrete because now you're start going to start to see the and early on it's still going to be you're buying an option. You're hoping it pays off as the winner they call. But as the numbers start to roll in, this will be less of a opaque game and more transparent. If you're an investor, my advice is stay until you feel you're in that that that place because right now getting into any of these companies, you're playing the trading game. It's mood and momentum. And you can ride the momentum if you want, but there's nothing to do with investing in valuation. >> You're playing the trading game and you can't even trade because it's not liquid. >> No, but I'm saying once they go public, the early part of going public, it'll be it'll be completely a trader's paradise. As an investor, you're going to get eaten alive if you go into that space and bring your valuation to justify what you do because God help you that valuation is not going to matter on a dayto-day, week to week, monthtomonth basis in terms of what it does for prices. >> Earlier, professor, I I brought up uh Nvidia, which is building the

[00:14:17] architecture, the other chip companies, as well as the the hyperscalers, and you said, "Oh, well, I'm focusing on the private markets." That's the real question, the LLM. But a lot of the earnings growth in the the publicly traded companies that the chip architecture that the semic companies and the hyperscalers is because of the private LLMs right so >> being their customers right >> yeah they are their customers >> it's their customers so basically in a in a sense it doesn't for if I'm investing in Nvidia do I care that companies are overspending on chips no in fact it's a good thing for me right >> so I don't see how you know that plays out the only way this process starts our feedback effects is when the correction to the big bubble happens and people look back they're going to start writing off there's going a lot of impairments of AI investments but guess what Nvidia will not be asked to return the cash they got on the chips right because that's been spent already so in many ways Nvidia and the chip companies and the data centers are the not just the

[00:15:20] front end of AI they're the most protected the money's already been spent the mistakes are already sunk costs and even if in hindsight we decide this bubble burst, we're not going to go back and collect our money back from them but it will impact their continuing growth because the new money coming in which they need to to justify will start to level off. Earlier you brought up Cisco and said okay Nvidia is the Cisco of this cycle even though I'm sure the the investors who lost the most money at least in percentage terms were the investors in the profitless in some cases revenueless VC companies the pets.com of the world in investors in Cisco lost money investors in Microsoft love lost money and I believe it was only over the past 12 months or so that Cisco hit its uh um its high in 2000 although with dividends it probably did that before that in in total return. So, you know, if you think the LLMs, you know, I'm just connecting the dots here. If you think LLMs are overvalued, you didn't use the the bubble word. Uh, how are you assessing the risk that this is

[00:16:20] going to stop? Because if if Nvidia is a beneficiary of all this capex and the capex stops, not only is the revenue growth going to go down, the profit growth going to go down, but I assume the multiple is going to go down. You know, you have the exact numbers. I'm just going to take a rough guess. Say trailing 12 months, PE for Nvidia 50, forward roughly 30. you know, it justifies that growth. If if it continues growing, it's it's it's grow there. Don't get me wrong, if the if there's a correction, Nvidia is going to drop in price. There's no way around it. The question is percentage drop. And it's not just Nvidia and AI companies. The market is going to take a drop because this is such a big part of the market. There's no place to hide in stocks if this correction comes because there will be punishment meed out in your portfolio even if you don't hold a single AI stock in your portfolio. Not one, right? The nature of the beast. So there there will be a cleaning up phase where everybody up and down the cycle

[00:17:21] and even people outside are going to get hurt when that correction hits, which is one reason people complain about bubbles. Look at how much money I lost. They don't have the perspective to think about when they entered the game, how much money they made before they lost the money. They they focus just on the losses. But there will be cleaning up as I said and that cleaning up is going to be painful for everybody involved. And the reason you mentioned Cisco being a bad investment, part of the reason is for a decade after the com bust, they seemed to not recognize that the bust had happened. They kept acting like this was a a temporary phase that they could keep doing what they had been doing which is buy another 15 companies every year small internet companies and keep growing. I have a feeling that if they recognize this earlier in the game, you'd have seen much a much smaller drop off in market cap than you did. So the lesson for Nvidia is when that correction happens bring you know bring your ambitions down. Don't try to keep

[00:18:23] doing what you used to when times were good and there was this, you know, 30, 40, 50 billion being invested by big companies and AI every year. You got to live with the moment. And listening to Jensen Wong, he strikes me as a sensible man that he would adjust to what's happening out there that he does he doesn't strike me as leading with his ego. >> So that is the risk factor. You described the left tail. How are you assessing that risk versus I guess your your base outlook versus the right tail risk where all these you know venture capitalists have all these podcasts and you know if what they're saying is going to come true Nvidia's revenues is going to be you know a trillion dollars in a few year where how are you assessing that that that spectrum >> I mean it's a sense the world is a big place people have different opinions >> I don't see I really don't care what other people think because it's my money that I'm investing if they want to invest based on a right tail of course They they should now I'm not going to talk them out of it. >> Right. So sorry to be clear I was asking about about your opinion on the Nvidia

[00:19:23] the the publicly traded companies that are beneficiaries of this whether it's the Nvidia or the other semi companies. I think you said you had invested in it since since 2018 in a YouTube video we can we can link to that came out recently maybe a month ago. You saw you thought it was overvalued but I believe you said that you still owned it. It's a pl there and there there's a plausible path I said for it to be the value to be justified where and so at this point if you ask me would I buy Nvidia at today's price I wouldn't I think where you know you need too much to go right to break even but that's me and that's my money if you ask me should I buy Nvidia I'm going to give you the numbers I'm going to give you the distribution and say you make your own judgment it's your money to invest so I think that it is richly priced it's been richly priced for the last four years. But remember, as it's been richly priced, it delivered huge returns for investors. So, I think that too much has to go right for me to buy at today's price. And it also draws a distinction between how you treat something you're planning to buy versus

[00:20:24] how you treat something that's already in your portfolio. I mean, in valuation books, it seems like a 01, right? If something is overvalued, you don't buy it. But if something is overvalued, you have it in your portfolio, you sell it right away. And I think that misses a lot of realw world issues. Taxes for instance, time horizons, you know, what are you going to do with that cash? That mean that you're far slower to pull the trigger on something you already own than you would if you were buying the same thing, right? So I you know I sold my last quarter of Invidia at the end of last year but it was staggered over four years in terms of how much I sold each year. And is it possible that I would regret it? No. Price could go up but I don't believe in looking back and saying I wish I'd done this. I wish I'd done that because that's a pathway to all kinds of damage in your portfolio. Now, I'm I'm okay now with what I I mean, Nvidia has

[00:21:24] been incredibly good for me as an investor and the fact that I didn't make that extra 25%. Now, I'm okay with leaving that on the table in return for the passing the sleep test. Sophisticated investors don't typically park their cash in high yield savings accounts. Instead, when they want yield, they turn to one of the fastest growing asset classes for institutional investors, private credit. These private credit strategies were once reserved exclusively for wealthy institutional investors, but now they're available to investors of all sizes thanks to the Fundrise Income Fund, which has more than 600 million invested and a 7.97% distribution rate. With most traditional savings yields falling, it's no wonder why sophisticated institutional and individual investors are turning to higher yielding asset classes like private credit. Click the link in the description or visit fundrise.com/m to invest in the Fundrise Income Fund in just minutes. The fund's total return in 2025 was 8% and the average annual total return since inception is 7.8%. Past performance does not guarantee future results. Current distribution rate as of 12312025. Carefully consider the investment material before investing

[00:22:25] including objectives, risks, charges, and expenses. This and other information can be found in the income funds perspectives at fundrise.com/income. This is a paid advertisement. Back to the interview. What about Microsoft? >> Microsoft I've owned since 2014. it's still intact fully in my portfolio partly because the plausible pathway I think is more reachable for Microsoft. So with Microsoft too I wouldn't buy at today's price but I don't need as much to happen to justify leaving in my portfolio. So it's a question of degree. To me, Nvidia, the degree to which you got to deliver great stuff is far greater than it is in Microsoft. And Microsoft since it's already in my portfolio. And given that I live in California with the taxes that I have to pay in capital gains, I can live with a slight with an overvalued Microsoft in my portfolio as long as that overvaluation is within within range within it's something I can live with. How do you assess the growth in its cloud business which has been ve very robust but the customers are the LLM

[00:23:25] companies that that you think are overvalued and so is is the is the growth engine for Microsoft the the the venture capital funded companies that >> I think this has become an excuse for old revenue growth at tech companies it's coming from AI would love to see how much of the growth in the cloud business actually comes from AI I mean let's face it Microsoft didn't have a stagnant cloud business which suddenly took off with AI. This has been the fastest growing component of Microsoft because we're all on the cloud. You are in the cloud. I'm on the cloud. I mean the cloud has become almost part of not just business life but individual life. So, you know, much as you know, so much as I might worry about people overspending, I don't think it's as dominant a piece of the cloud business at any of these companies as people make it out to be. In other words, tomorrow AI spending dropped. I I'm not sure that you're going to see cloud revenues at the at any of these companies decline. The growth might get lower, but I don't

[00:24:27] think you're going to see a drop off in revenues. How do you assess the cloud business in you know do you think it's a it's a good business or a bad business? It's become a necessity, right? It's like a utility, right? We need it. We need it because so much of everything we do has to go on the cloud because we have so much data that carrying it around in our phones or putting it on hard drives has become almost impossible to do. the way we transmit information, the way we store information and the cloud also has relation I mean because so many businesses you know they're connected to apps that are connected to the I mean we're all you know dependent on the cloud working as we re realize the minute one of these clouds goes down we realize how much of the world comes to a stop because so much it so I think it's a necessary business the question is what will the margins look like as it matures as a businesses because there'll be a point in time where even the cloud business levels off and the question then is will the margins stay where they

[00:25:27] are which are very healthy numbers for both Microsoft and Google or will they start to decline because it is a mature business and competition is going to kick in. The other thing I'm not quite clear about that somebody can is how sticky these businesses are. the customer picks Amazon cloud over Google cloud for their business. How difficult is it for them to disentangle themselves from one and go to the other and my guess is these [clears throat] companies create stickiness in their models which makes it difficult for customers to leave once they're on a particular cloud cloud platform. So that creates the stickiness and the networking benefits that leave you in a particular cloud platform even if the costs look a little lower in a different platform. Switching might not be easy in this business. >> What about Google? >> Google is a company that's still so dependent advertising. You got to wonder how a company with so many smart bright people and it has never been able to go

[00:26:28] beyond the search box in terms of actually delivering value. I mean that much talked about alphabet is really six dwarves and one giant, right? Because none of the bets have really been able to stand alone as businesses. A couple of years ago, I wrote a piece on on sugar daddy, the what I call the sugar daddy problem. And what I was talking about is is corporate VCs where you know and sovereign funds what do they share in common? They operate in a business where there are regular VCs and regular investment funds. But the difference is a corporate VC when things go bad can go to the parent company. The parent company says oh you poor people here take another two billion. Right? Same thing with sovereign funds. You lose money people don't fire. to stay the sovereign fund because the Saudi government is not going to get rid of the Saudi sovereign fund. So what happens is when these business when

[00:27:28] these investors make mistakes for to be a truly effective VC you got to be ruthless in terms of cutting your losses and walking away from bad businesses. But that's tough to do for corporate VCs because they keep getting this money to push more and more because many of the businesses are within the company, right? You don't want to cut the So I think there is with Alphabet the the question is can you change the way Alphabet invests to allow all this money they're investing to actually show up as value. I think that with Gemini, they've actually played the game much better than they have with their other investments and maybe way more will be the other opening they can use to kind of get into automated driving. But I think a lot remains to be seen as to whether they can build businesses in those areas that actually deliver value on their own. >> And you have a YouTube channel far bigger than my own YouTube channel. So

[00:28:30] you know that the the power of Google I don't there's some parts of YouTube that's not disclosed obviously you know Google's own by the same parent company Alphabet as Google. How do you how do you value YouTube? >> I value all these companies as ecosystems like Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp are a part of an ecosystem. The entire ecosystem delivers the advertising revenues. So even though the revenues look like they go to Facebook, it's somebody using WhatsApp who sent a link to somebody else using WhatsApp to go on a Facebook page. So So these companies just want you to stay in that ecosystem and Google keeps people in the YouTube has become a very effective device for Google to keep in the ecosystem. It's one of the few success stories of a standalone business as well because you also have the YouTube subscriptions, people getting their TV channels through YouTube. So I think you know of all the things Google has invested in YouTube is probably the greatest single investment that billion dollars invested in YouTube

[00:29:32] has paid off 100fold in terms of value created for the company. So I you know to me it is a free platform for Google though there are benefits they get their ecosystem they're not doing it for charity. So, you know, it's it's it's I think been something that's added to Google's value, just like Amazon Prime has value way beyond just the Prime subscriptions on Amazon. I think YouTube has value way beyond what they collect as subscription and actually direct revenues on YouTube. And now we turn to Meta, which I believe unlike a lot of the other Magnificent 7 companies is is a vast majority of their spending on AI is for themselves and for their own product. you know, Microsoft is spending money and but for other customers, same with Amazon, whereas Meta, they're they're spending uh their own money for their own product to improve that that model. So, I think there we could see a more direct ROI or ROI, you know, >> and you know what I would track? No, FA Meta actually keeps track of how much

[00:30:33] time a meta user spends in the meta system. At least they do it at the Facebook level. If using AI keeps you in the meta ecosystem, I think LA the last estimate I saw was 57 minutes in the day. You know, typical human being spends in some part of the meta ecosystem. If that can become an hour and a half, that's a huge plus in terms of advertising revenues. So there the ROI will not show up as direct money you're paying for AI products and services. it might show up as you spending more time on Instagram because AI has made it more attractive to you. They found a way to make it more addictive to you and that then shows up as more advertising. So I I think that's what I would watch is time that people spend in the meta ecosystem is it going up because if AI is being effective that's why you'll see the effects show up. >> So the the free cash flow for for meta has been declining. I you know on your

[00:31:34] website you wrote about how you you think that lease liabilities I actually forget but they should count as liabilities like I think it's not on its balance sheet yet but Oracle has half a trillion dollars of of lease liabilities like there we are going to find if you know we we >> Oracle's gone a little off I mean they they've left the they've clearly gone off the map in terms of their AI spending they've I mean they've made a huge bet so I would actually set Oracle separately from the companies we've talked about. I think Oracle is overb partly because they want to be a trillion. They want to be in that club. They wanted to be mag eight with Oracle as a in many ways they they they remind me of a gambler who puts all his chips on one number hoping it pays off because if it pays off they become part of the trillion dollar club. So, I think they're they're investing very differently from everybody else because they seem to want to get this big pot that puts them into that club. I think

[00:32:37] for Meta, cash flow, the free cash flow is down for all of these companies because that capex on AI comes out of your free cash flow. But here's the difference between the com bubble investment and the AI investment. The dot bubble investment was far smaller than the AI investment. You didn't have tens of billions of dollars being invested. And second, the companies making those investments are often money losing companies. So the bubble hit doubly hard because when the bubble burst, not only did the the the shine come off those investments, you now had money losing companies that were struggling to make it. That's why it's such the big AI investments. I'm I'm not there are of course exception. Big AI investments now are being made by some of the most cashrich companies on the face of the earth. And the debt they take on, I know there are debt stories. At least in these companies, the debt is such a small fraction that they could pay off all the debt they owe with one year of free cash flow. None of them is going to go

[00:33:37] bankrupt. None of them is going to see their ratings drop to see because they have so much cash cow cash flow coming in. So with a Meta or Microsoft, even if there's an AI collapse, there will be an impairment. But you know what? They make so much money that their impairment will still leave them with positive earnings. This is not the kind of impairment that created huge losses and default risk. So will there be regrets if this works out? Absolutely. But those regrets don't have to translate into default risk and distress like they did in the dotcom bubble. Amazon came very close to going under in 2001. The only thing that saved them was Jeff Bezos raising a billion dollars towards the start of 2001 and leaving it as a cash balance and that basically allowed them to get through the hard times. In this case, I don't think you have that kind of default risk hanging over. But there'll be a subset of the AI companies that have borrowed money to find AI and those companies are going to be in trouble when the correction hits. what you said

[00:34:39] about how the the the co the the customers spending on AI are some of the most profitable companies uh that have ever existed, the largest companies that have ever ever existed. I have said that almost almost word for word myself and I believe it to be true technically because Microsoft and Amazon are so profitable. However, a lot of their customers as as we talked about earlier are these VC backed companies that are burning a lot of money and um you know there was one out >> customers for I'm sorry customers for what >> for for AI cloud like like you know Microsoft is buying >> the cloud is a different business the cloud is a business that's independent of AI right it's a business that AI has helped but it's a business it's a function of the times we live in right so we we shouldn't act like the cloud business was created by a portion of the cloud business benefit from AI. A big chunk of the cloud business has nothing to do with AI. It's got to do with the way we store and use data. And we live in a world where there's so much stuff

[00:35:39] to use and store that we need the cloud. So I think we're overstating how much of Amazon. So let's say we took Amazon's total revenues and we took the portion of the revenues that the cloud business that the AI business is creating for cloud. I'll wager that fraction is a tiny number. I might be wrong because they don't actually break it out, but I wager it's a tiny number. So, I think if you're worried about clients collapsing and that affecting their revenues, it will, but at the margin, it's not going to cause their revenues to drop by 20%. What it'll do is it'll make their revenue growth go from 8% to 4%. That's where you're going to see it show up, which is bad, but it's not catastrophic. So I think that that there is a segment which is particularly exposed to AI collapse but these companies have other other you know other things on the table that will allow them to generate cash flows and value that will keep them going well past that collapse.

[00:36:40] >> I bet you're probably right about Amazon and I think it really is important to look at what is the reality. Like a lot of people thought oh well uh these tariffs are going to be horrible for China. let's sell China or short China. A big stock in China in the Chinese market is Alibaba. I looked at it and yeah, the the Alibaba's revenue to the US is around 10% or maybe even less. I it's totally important to look at you know beyond the narrative what are the actual numbers but professor wi with Microsoft I think you know to the extent that their capex has exploded their capital expenditure I think a lot of that is because of the AI and they're buying GPUs >> capex that's the bad side right I'd love to know how much of Microsoft's revenues comes from pilot or whatever other AI stuff you think because there again I think the percentage of revenues that Microsoft gets that's AI related is is a small fraction. So, I'm not saying that it's not a big chunk of the cost. That's the negative. The revenue side, which is where you're going to see the impact of a correction, is going to be much

[00:37:40] smaller than we think it is because these companies get a relatively small percentage. They have big revenues, so relatively small percentage is still no billions or tens of billions of dollars. A relatively small percentage of those revenues. >> Yes. And and I guess you're part part of your point is that AI bubble or not, you know, Xbox and uh you Microsoft Word are still going to be tremendously profitable businesses >> and the cloud and the Microsoft cloud is still going to be immensely profitable after you've written off that AI segment, right? Because the demand for the cloud doesn't go away just because AI is has crashed and burned or has become a much smaller story. >> What about Tesla? >> Tesla is interesting, right? I mean, it's a company that I'm not even sure what it is anymore. And even the people who are the strongest advocates for Tesla hardly ever mention cars anymore. It's almost like it's become an afterthought. It's robots and it's automated driving and ride sharing and all these potential businesses. And that's always been Tesla's power, right? To keep shifting the narrative from what

[00:38:43] you think it is to something different and being able to carry enough investors to buy into the new story. You know, I used to think it was a because it was a young company with a charismatic CEO, but this is now a a trillion dollar at least at points in time, a trillion dollar company where the CEO has been around enough that we know who he is in terms of his pluses and minuses and it's still able to do it. So, you're writing a case study about a company that can shift narratives and carry investors with it. Tesla would be a perfect case study which is you need investors who are not just investors they're fans they love your company they love and you're able to convince them that you're now a different company and they go along right whether it's you're now an energy company you're now a robotic so I think people are buying not into the product you're making but some underlying strength they think you have to enter new businesses disrupt them change them and end up dominating them the forward Forward

[00:39:44] price to sales for Tesla is is 15. The forward price to earnings is 220. >> You know what? It's the only way you can justify Tesla's valuation is by mapping out a way it gets into a different higher margin business. It cannot sustain this value as a car company and Tesla and that's where I think you you know even Tesla bulls will agree with you on that. The question is what is that business? Will it be big enough? Can they make enough money? As I said, I don't feel enough confidence in any of these businesses, robotics, automated driving, that I'm willing to make a bet on it. But if you're a Tesla investor, you might have the confidence that one of these businesses or maybe both of these business are going to be big enough for you to jump in. So, I would agree to disagree on that. And I, you know, I also don't like my stocks to have a political component to them. And Tesla, for better or worse, has become a political stock. What I mean by that is people buy or sell your products based on what they perceive your politics to be. You're in a dangerous place as an

[00:40:46] investor. And I and I said I don't want that. I don't like that. The reason I don't I'm underinvested in China is precisely that reason. The government is a player in every story. And Tesla, for better or worse, that's become part of the story. The politics has become part of the business narrative. And I'm not comfortable with business narratives that have politics in them. So it's part of the reason Tesla was the first of the Max 7 that I exited from and it's gone. It's doubled in price since. So again, I'm not going to look back and say, you know what, I should because I did it because the reasons I specified and those reasons still hold >> and you may have been wrong on on the price. I don't know when you sold, but in terms of fundamentals, I should say the revenues and the margins have gone down over the past, you know, as an investor. You don't care about revenues and margins. You care about the price, right? I sold at about 300. I know at least at the start of this month, it was close to 500. So, I mean, I've left $200 in the table. >> Professor, when it comes to AI, how much

[00:41:47] do you buy the narrative that it is going to improve margins and you know, regardless of any company, but >> collectively across all companies? No, it'll reduce margins. >> If everybody has it, nobody has it. Which means that if I can give you as a grocery store, if I can give you an AI product that actually makes it easier for your customers to buy stuff, you're saying, "This is good. It or to cut costs on inventory, saying, "This is good. My costs are lower. I should have higher margins." Here's what you're missing. I'm selling that same product down the street to your competing grocerers. They're all lowering costs. And you get the what happened in online retailing. If everybody's cost structure goes down, you don't end up with higher margins. You end up with lower prices. That's what competition does. And you have lower prices. Everybody walks away with lower cost structures but also lower margins. So collectively across all companies, I don't see this as good for profits. But there will be individual companies that make money from selling you the products. They will

[00:42:48] make money. But on the companies buying these AI products and services, I'm not upbeat about that converting into higher margins and higher cash flows. So I'm just taking what you said that every company or most companies their costs will go down but their margins will go down is a consequence of that logically that the >> consumers will benefit right I mean who are the biggest beneficiaries in the online retailing >> it was you and I as consumers because we were able to get a choice and a cost we would never have been able to get before online retailing came along. So be good for us collectively as a society but might not be great for the businesses that deliver us >> and deflationary >> that I don't know because that's going to be a function of fiscal policy. So there's so many other things that go into it. So the fact that you have lower prices on individual products and services doesn't mean that the rest of your life isn't is is being controlled. So it might be deflationary for some segments of what you do. Right? So when I say lower prices, not that your

[00:43:49] eggplant is cheaper than it is today, because somebody's got to grow the eggplant and get it. So the cost savings are not going to be that the eggplants are cheaper to the groceryer. It's once the eggplants come in, AI allows them to keep the inventory more. So the costs you're controlling are at the margin in the store, not the cost of the inputs that come in. If those inputs go up, you can still have double digit inflation in a world where your margins are lower, right? you're charging the lower price than you would have in a in a in a different setting, but that's neither here nor there. >> And so a year ago, you thought the market was overvalued. And with the earnings up 12% and the S&P up roughly a little bit more than that, the valuation is a similar story. So still overvalued, but not grotesqually more overvalued than it was last year. >> It's not a I mean, it's not bubble overvalued. it's overvalued like it's been for pretty much of the la I mean you could you could tell the same story at the start of every year for the last 10 which should be a cautionary note because if you view that overvaluation

[00:44:50] as a signal you should get out of stocks in hindsight being a terrible signal so if you're going to make an argument that it's a bubble that's a different argument but I don't see it in the numbers >> do you think that this double digit earnings growth is sustainable I think the current analyst estimates of growth you have for 2026 is around 10%. >> You know what? It's been double digit for the last 15 years on average. This is not an aberration, right? There's something that's changed in the economics of business in the century. And I think there are two things. One is companies seem to be able to deliver earnings through good times and bad times through crisis. Things that used to bring earnings down in the last century, a recession, a slowing economy, so don't seem to have the same consequences. The other is the overall level of earnings. Individual companies see earnings going down have actually become more stable in this century than they were in the last one. And if you're wondering why, there are two reasons that used to be given. One is globalization that companies even if

[00:45:51] the domestic economy were doing badly were able to to get their earnings from overseas. But this year that was put to the test because if your if that was the reason for earnings being solid and stable, this should be the year that came apart because of tariffs and the global trade wars that have so I think after this year I'm not sure globalization is the answer. The other is the S&P 500 has become an increasingly techdinated index. 30% of the market gap comes from tech companies. you're saying so what tech companies have be are much more flexible much more adept at dealing with things changing around them and that could explain why they're able to keep the earnings going even during crisis and the second is the biggest tech companies that account for a big chunk of the earnings are money machines their earnings are actually not just high but incredibly predictable and stable because they dominate their markets so what they're talking about Google or Facebook you look at their earnings from

[00:46:53] advertising ing incredibly resilient in the face of what's happening around them. So I think part of this is a fundamental story and maybe those of us who value the market are the ones who are not adjusting quickly enough to a changing world and we got to leave that door open. So, it's entirely possible that stocks are overvalued, but it's also possible that a structural shift has happened in the economy and markets that could explain why they're priced at 24 times earnings as opposed to the 16 or 18 times earnings we thought was the norm prior to this century. >> And which way do you lean? You looking at your equity risk premium ERP roughly for January, you had it at 4.23%. In what percentile is that historically? >> It's probably the median. It's around the m middle of the distribution. So the equity risk premium is roughly the median for the last 60 years. I mean of the computation going back to 1960. It is low by post 2008 standards. Post 2008

[00:47:54] we saw a jump in the equity risk premium partly because of the 2008 crisis and these rolling crises since. So this is low if you frame it against 2008 numbers. It's pretty much what you'd expect if you frame it against a much longer time period. And this is why you can have this wild debate where everybody looks at the same numbers and comes to very different conclusions about where the market is. The one group of people that I'm not sure what they're looking at to make judgments are people who essentially throw the word bubble into the mix, but don't have anything to back it up. So, if you're going to make an argument for a bubble, it's got to be based on something that I'm not seeing in the numbers right now. >> That's that's interesting. So you talked about the three Ps possible, plausible, and probable. The is it sounds like you don't think a bubble is probable. Is it plausible? Is it possible? >> Of course, a bubble is always plausible. It's been true for every year of the stock market, right? There is always a pathway for stocks to collapse. That's why we demand an equity risk premium. So

[00:48:56] that's a very weak test to apply on the market. So, I think that a bubble is always plausible, but to invest on that plausible, in this case, not invest based on that plausible. Keep your money out of stocks to me is a horrendous mistake to make because in hindsight, you're going to end up with returns that lag somebody who doesn't try to time the market, goes through the bubble, loses money, and comes back again. So, I think that it's not the statement that your market's in a bubble that bothers me. It's what you do in reaction to it that can create cost for you in the long term. >> I suppose people saying it's a bubble, they may rest their case just on the uh price to earnings ratio where I think the PE right now is the highest it's been saved for maybe 99 and >> this is about the laziest justification for a bubble. Chpt could do better than that. If this is your basis for your expertise and market timing, it's time for you to find a different profession.

[00:49:58] I mean, come on. I mean, that's like a I I'm me going into a doctor's office and they're taking my temperature and essentially passing my entire judgment on my health based on my temperature. It's a very rough metric. Price earnings ratio is the most volatile and messy of all pricing ratios. to make a judgment about the entire market just because a PE is higher than the average. I I mean I I don't even know what to tell you because I mean that's I mean let's face it a gentleman won a Nobel Prize building on that, right? Robert Schiller basically built an entire story about market bubbles built on the Schiller PE. I mean sometimes you get accidental no bells I guess because you know in hindsight even he accepts that you're missing a lot of stuff when you look at the piece. So he actually has changed his tune but there are a whole bunch of people who still put their hang their hats on chiller PS and that's their entire basis. No. So if you want to make an argument for markets being overvalued, make it a more reasoned one

[00:50:59] that goes past the PE ratio and brings in, you know, know if your story is that margins are at all-time highs, that competition is coming, that AI is going to reduce margins, and that I I'm willing to listen, that's a story built on fundamentals, but a PE ratio story, I'm sorry, there's nothing there. When you you look at the equity risk premium which at the peak of the dotcom bubble I believe was in the low twos maybe high ones you you tell me the equity risk premium is now double that is the current equity risk premium being higher than that is is that because the expected earnings growth is higher or is it because >> it's got nothing to do it's very little to do with earnings growth it's got everything to do with the fact that the cash being returned by companies in the S&P 500 is so I mean last year there was more more than a trillion dollars in buybacks and this is not unique right this has been going on for a while you add that to the dividends collectively US companies are returning about 85% of

[00:52:00] their earnings in cash and if you add that on to the dividend your cash yield the dividend yield looks like it's at a historic low right one and a half to 2% but we added the buybacks you're looking at a 4% cash yield and that's well within the norm of what companies return as cash to their investors. [snorts] >> So, it's the cash flows that are holding it up. >> And so, the DCF that you prefer looks not at EPS or or net income, but at cash flows, which is dividend. >> No, wait, wait. You can't do a DCF with net income. Net income is not cash flow, right? So, to begin with, if you do a DCF and use earnings, you've already broken a fundamental first principle. It's got to be a cash flow. The choice is do you want to go with the traditional definition of cash flow which is dividends a dividend discount model or do you want to go with this augmented version of cash flow which includes buybacks with a dividend discount model I'll save you the trouble the market is overvalued by 80%. It's a bubble but that misses the fact that US

[00:53:02] companies have shifted away from dividends to buybacks. It's a cash return policy and if you added the c the buybacks then you get more reasonable cash flows and that's at the basis of the 4.2% premium. In fact, I computed the implied equity risk premium using just dividends. It's about 1.5%. So if you focus just on dividends, you've been out of stocks now for 15 years waiting for dividends to come back. I'll make a prediction. You will be waiting for dividends to come back for a really long time because they're not coming back. I think buybacks are the way in which companies will turn. I think of them as flexible dividends and I think they actually make more sense from an equity cash flow perspective than these fixed dividends that you get locked into in good times and in bad times. >> Why is dividends plus buybacks a better metric for valuation than earnings? >> Earnings are not cash flows. It's not even in the in the competition. You can look at a PE ratio, but you're doing a discounted cash. You can't take the

[00:54:02] earnings out of a company, [snorts] right? I mean, it's it's you you've got to bring in all these adjustments to make it into cash flows, including how much you have in depreciation, non-cash expenses, you subtract. That's the big big difference, right? You can't return. So, any investor who's discounting earnings, just stop. >> Don't even try to do DCF. If that's the first principle, you're failing, then stick with PE ratios. There's nothing wrong with pricing. I'd rather that you do an honest pricing than these messy, dishonest DCFs. And a lot of DCFs that I see out there really shouldn't even be in the in the in the ring because they just break down on fundamental first principles. >> What about a DCF with free free cash flow, >> which is what I mean ultimately that's basically where dividends and buybacks come from, right? That's basically what you're trying to estimate. Now you could take individual companies and estimate free cash flows. There are two problems with free cash flows. One is that they

[00:55:04] swing a lot from year to year, right? Because they don't, you know, you don't smooth out things like capex and so you can have big plus years, big minus years. And the second is computing free cash flows for financial service companies which remain a pretty significant segment of the S&P 500 is impossible to do. Impossible. Why? Because what's capex for a bank? What's working capital for a bank? Right? Right? So you end up with this messy definition of So we're using dividends and buybacks not because we think that they're the the right they're they're a proxy for free cash flows because ultimately we're assuming that's where the cash flows to buy back stock and dividends come from. But it's got to be free cash flow equity. Again don't you know you can never stop free cash flow without specifying to equity or to the firm. Equity is after debt payments to the firm is before debt payments. So you can use free cash equity but it's really messy to do that for 500 companies many of which have are financial service companies or some of which are financial service companies >> and the the big companies in the market

[00:56:06] I think with the exception of probably Tesla the vast majority of their earnings has have gone up a a lot over the past year. What about free cash flow? A because free free cash flow a negative into free cash flow is capital expenditure. A lot Microsoft, Meta, all of these companies are spending a tremendous amount on capital expenditure. A lot of which goes to Nvidia as revenue and profit. Are you you have concerns there? I I believe you know >> the concern. It's not about what they're spending. It's about whether they'll get the returns. I mean there's we want these companies to grow, right? You can't have your cake and eat it too. You want these companies to grow. If you want them to go, they have to reinvest. So understand the zeal they have to be in the next big space which say CSAI. The challenge there is they're investing this upfront on a hope and potential. There's really nothing on the ground right now right now that you can use to justify the investment. So you're an investor in those companies. It's not the capex per se that should bother you. It's whether that capex will pay off as higher earnings in the future. And

[00:57:08] that's the big unknown. And there I think that Apple is probably in a better shape than the companies that are jumping in with both feet and investing tens of billions of dollars because we really don't know yet what form the AI business is going to take and whether we need these huge investments in chips and data centers and and power and water to kind of produce things that might be producible at a much lower cost with much less technology. [snorts] And how does the decline in free cash flow impact your valuation analysis? Because you know Oracle I think I still think their dividend buybacks still looks pretty good. >> I think this is ane I mean you're using five companies which are big meta investors. There are 500 companies the S&P 500. The collective cash flow last year was 7% or maybe even 10% higher than it was the previous year. So, it's not affecting cash return yet. Maybe it

[00:58:08] will start to show up, but we're not seeing it in the numbers yet. Perhaps we did a true free cash flow last year, you'd get a much lower number than we got what it got as dividends and buybacks. That by itself doesn't bother me because that's that's the upfront investment. If they keep investing these amounts, I think it's eventually going to hit the cash flows through the they they don't have the cash to do the buybacks anymore. And it'll get even worse if they borrow the money to make these investments because they create risks that they that they historically haven't faced that's allowed them to deliver these nice stable earnings. >> Professor, if if I can, Professor, what do you think about gold? How do you value it? >> It's what you go to when you lose trust. And we're in a world where people have lost trust. And there's a segment of the market that believes we are heading for a cliff. It's it's your it's your insurance against catastrophe. So I think the fact that that segment is bigger than it's been historically and includes people who historically would never have been in there. I heard Ray

[00:59:08] Dalio say that he might I mean 20 years ago that would not have been the case. So there are people in that crowd who are unusual members of that crowd. So I think that that should send us all a message about the potential for catastrophe that it's higher now than it's been historically for a variety of reasons. and that you might need to buy some insurance. Whether that takes a form of gold or not, I will leave in your hand. >> Professor, thank you very much for for joining us. We will link to your to your ex and your YouTube channel as as well as your website. Thank you everyone for watching. Please leave a rating and review on Monetary Matters for Apple and Spotify. Thank you. >> Take care. >> Thanks for watching. Interested in the Fundrise Income Fund? Click the link in the description to learn more. Until next time.
