[00:00:00] Index funds are known for their ultra low fees, which don't get me wrong are a great attribute for an investment product, but fees are not the only cost that investors need to think about. The details of index and by extension index fund rebalancing lead to hard to see but significant costs far in excess of index fund fees. This fact shows cracks in the famous arithmetic of active management. Index fund implementation is focused on matching index returns, minimizing tracking error to the index, not maximizing investment returns. A more flexible approach that doesn't rigidly trade to match the index could increase returns for investors. There are some funds doing this, but most investors have never heard of them. I'm Ben Felix, chief investment officer at PWL Capital, and I'm going to tell you why index funds, as great as they are, still have room to improve. [Music] The hidden costs for index funds come from three potentially related sources, all occurring when index funds trade.

[00:01:02] Adverse selection, price impact, and mean reversion. Index funds are synonymous with sensible investing for good reason. They're lowcost and broadly diversified. They beat the vast majority of actively managed funds most of the time. They're tax efficient and easy to understand. And they're consistent with foundational finance theory. Index funds emerged from the observation in the late 1960s and early 1970s that most active managers who aimed to beat the market were not actually beating market indexes. As the evidence continued to mount, some very smart people realized that simply investing in the market indexes that most managers couldn't beat while minimizing costs could be a winning investment strategy. The first index fund available to retail investors was launched in 1976 by Vanguard. And while it was initially criticized mostly by active managers, the index fund has since become one of the most impactful financial market innovations in history. Index funds do deserve their glowing reputation. And to be clear, I have not changed my mind on them being the most sensible investments for most people,

[00:02:03] but they are not perfect. Indexes are fundamentally designed to represent a market or market segment, not to be an investment. The market isn't a static thing that stays the same forever. There are IPOs, seasoned equity offerings, buybacks, D-listings, and indexes add or drop constituents based on their inclusion criteria. Since the sole job of an index fund is to match the returns of the index it's tracking, they quickly trade to reflect these changes. I'll explain later why the specific details of changes in market composition are problematic for index fund investors. But first, I want to revisit the famous arithmetic of active management, one of the foundations of index investing. Bill Sharp's 1991 arithmetic of active management states in simple terms that in aggregate investors in actively managed funds must underperform investors in index funds because in aggregate they both own the market but active funds have higher fees and costs. That is a simple and powerful argument

[00:03:04] for lowcost index funds. An argument that I have used many times myself but few people pay attention to footnote 4 in Sharp's paper. The footnote explains that in Sharp's model, passive managers purchase their securities before the beginning of the period in question and do not sell them until after the period ends. In other words, they don't trade at all in the model. Sharp does acknowledge that when passive managers do buy or sell, they may have to trade with active managers. At such times, the active managers may gain from the passive managers because of the active managers willingness to provide desired liquidity at a price. This is important because in reality there is trading. Even index funds which generally don't trade much do have to trade to respond to changes in the market and changes in the index that they're tracking. Like I mentioned earlier, companies go public while others get delisted. Listed companies may buy back shares or issue shares. And indexes add or remove stocks based on their inclusion criteria. The fact that index funds do need to trade

[00:04:04] breaks the basic principle of the arithmetic of active management, at least as it's commonly understood. It doesn't shatter it. The general logic is still very useful, but it at least shows some cracks around the edges. This idea was articulated in the 2018 paper sharpening the arithmetic of active management. The author argues, similar to what I just described, that sharps equality is based on the implicit assumption that the market portfolio never changes, which does not hold in the real world. The author argues that this leaves room for informed active managers to add value by trading against uninformed index funds. I actually do buy this argument. I'm not about to sell you on active management. Don't worry, just stick with me for a minute. There is evidence from multiple studies on active management that active managers in aggregate really do have prefee returns above the returns of index funds. The problem is that the high fees of active management eat up any benefit for investors on average. That doesn't make this information useless, though. I'll get to how it can be useful to index investors or investors who think like index investors in a minute. The

[00:05:05] main issue for index funds is that the nature and timing of index fund trading results in significant quantifiable costs that could be avoided relatively easily with more intentional implementation. Basically, what if we had a fund like an index fund that was actually designed to be an investment rather than rigidly tracking an index designed to represent a market? Index fund implementation costs come in three main forms. Adverse selection, buying stocks when firms, the underlying businesses issuing stock, wants to sell, and selling when firms want to buy. Price impact, buying stocks after they have become more expensive due to being included in an index and selling stocks after they have become less expensive due to being removed from an index. And mean reversion, buying stocks with high valuations that soon fall and selling stocks with low valuations that soon rise. Stocks added to an index tend to have high valuations while stocks removed tend to have relatively low valuations. Let's start with adverse selection. Likely the largest cost to total market index funds like VTI. These

[00:06:05] effects are described in the 2025 paper index rebalancing and stock market composition. Do index funds incur adverse selection costs? The authors explained that indices are subject to adverse selection on changes to market composition due to who is choosing to enter or exit the market. This adverse selection can happen when firms move between the private and public markets and when existing public firms issue and buy back shares. The authors show in the paper as we should expect that index funds mechanically respond to these changes in market composition and as a result they incur adverse selection costs. It's pretty simple when you think about it. Firms companies that list on the stock market are generally pretty savvy and they act in their own best interests. For example, firms will issue stock when they think their share price is high and they will buy back stock when they think their share price is low. Indexes quickly incorporate these changes to market composition. Buying stock when firms issue and selling when they buy back and index funds follow suit. That makes perfect sense if the objective of the index is to represent

[00:07:05] the market. But it puts index fund rebalancing exactly at odds with firms own beliefs about their share prices. It's a similar situation for IPOs, which tend to occur in waves, often coinciding with high market valuations and to underperform in the long run. I've got a video on IPOs if you want to learn more about that. But in short, buying IPOs on the secondary market shortly after they have started trading has generally been a losing bet and index funds are buying them. The low returns of IPOs are even lower during IPO waves like the dot runup. The surprising thing here is that while the rebalancing volume of these types of transactions make up less than 10% of the assets of a typical index fund, the adverse selection costs are so large that they are able to materially affect index fund returns. The authors find that the long short portfolio that buys new issuance and sells buybacks mirroring index fund rebalancing trades has a negative 4% annual return and a negative 2.8% five factor alpha. This portfolio has negative loadings on the value and profitability factors suggesting that index rebalancing leads

[00:08:06] to buying growth stocks and stocks with weak profitability which have lower expected returns while selling value stocks and stocks with robust profitability which have higher expected returns. The fact that the alpha the portion of returns unexplained by factor exposures is negative and statistically significant suggests that there are adverse selection costs beyond the factor loadex. The long short portfolio that buys index additions and IPOs and sells index deletions and delistings has an annual return of negative 5.5% with a statistically insignificant alpha. These findings are consistent with observations from other research suggesting that IPOs and seasoned equity offerings have poor returns in general, that firms issue stock to meet index fund buying demand when stock valuations are high, and that the mechanical index fund buying of stocks after IPOs leads to underperformance. Figuring out how much this is actually costing index funds is not easy to do because the same trades affecting the index fund are affecting the benchmark index. Benchmarking an index fund against its underlying index will make it look like

[00:09:08] everything is fine. The authors get around this issue by creating counterfactual index funds that rebalance on a rolling basis and allow the period of time the index fund waits to rebalance in response to changes in the market composition to vary from 1 month to four years. This just delays trading after changes in the market, potentially reducing the effects of adverse selection costs. The counterfactual index fund is largely identical to real world index funds like VTI, but differs in how quickly it responds to changes in the composition of the stock market. The authors compare these counterfactual delayed rebalancing portfolios to a quarterly calendar-based rebalancing portfolio, which resembles how live index funds actually implement. They find that the counterfactual annual rolling rebalancing beats the quarterly calendar rebalancing fund, the one that resembles a real index fund by 0.32% annualized over the full sample from 1981 through 2023. The slower rebalancing index has the strongest relative returns in years after booms in growth stocks like the 1990s where it avoids buying equity issuance and IPOs

[00:10:08] at high valuations. Longer rebalancing horizons produce monotonically larger outperformance up to 0.81% 81% annualized with a 4-year waiting period for rebalancing. Even if we take the lower end of that estimate, 0.32%, that is a big deal. VTI has an expense ratio of 0.03%. Which is great. But if it's costing another 0.32% to own relative to a more flexible rebalancing strategy, it's actually kind of expensive. That's it. That's adverse selection. The second potential issue with mechanical rebalancing is price pressure on index reconstitution. This is distinct from adverse selection, but has historically had estimated costs of a similar magnitude. When an index changes to include or exclude a stock, those changes are announced before index funds buy or sell the stock. This effect increases or decreases the price of the stock in anticipation of it being bought or sold in the future. But that effect is not permanent. The result is that index funds may have a drag on returns stemming from their predictable buying and selling behavior. Similar to adverse

[00:11:10] selection, this cost is not easily visible because it affects indexes and index funds equally. Research on this idea goes back to the 1980s with two highly cited 1986 papers where the authors document that when stocks get added to the S&P 500, their price goes up and that these increases are likely due to anticipation of index funds buying the stocks in the future. The problem is that the price effect reverses after the stocks have been bought, resulting in index funds buying at temporarily high prices. The opposite effect happens for stocks removed from the index. The 2011 paper, the index premium and its hidden costs for index funds, estimates the lower bound cost of this index premium for S&P 500 index funds to be 0.21% to 0.28% annually over the period 1990 to 2005, peaking at between 0.65% and 0.82% in the year 2000. More recent research, the disappearing index effect, has argued that the effect has counterintuitively declined over time despite the growth of index funds. One surprising reason for this is that since

[00:12:10] index funds own so many stocks of all shapes and sizes today, a stock migrating from one index to another reduces the price effects compared to net buying and selling of stocks that were not previously included in index funds at all. A 2024 paper from Dimensional Fund Advisors looks at index reconstitution costs for securities added to and removed from 10 indexes excluding stocks that migrate across indexes over the period 2014 to 2023. The paper finds unsurprisingly that trade volumes and stock prices spike around index reconstitution dates and then decline thereafter. The average excess return to added or deleted securities is 4% over the 20 trading days leading up to reconstitution with a reversal of negative 5.7% in the next month. Again, index funds are buying high, selling low based on short-term price pressure, and then eating the reversal when the price pressure is gone. The authors argue that an index tracking approach generally lacks flexibility, which can leave returns on the table. Another interesting point that is less frequently discussed is the

[00:13:11] valuations of stocks that get added to and removed from indexes. We have established that in addition to adverse selection, there is still meaningful short-term price pressure on index inclusion and exclusion, at least for non-migrating stocks that reverses after index funds buy or sell. This has an implicit cost for index funds. Looking at longer horizons, the 2023 paper, earning alpha by avoiding the index rebalancing crowd shows that in the year before S&P 500 index inclusion, stocks tend to have very high returns and in the year after they tend to have very low returns. The opposite is true for index deletions. Over such a long time frame, this can't all be the index inclusion effect. Instead, the author showed that additions are 92% more expensive based on multiple valuation ratios than the market and discretionary deletions are 55% cheaper than the market at the times of their respective additions and deletions. This total effect has declined in the second half of the sample, but from 2005 to 2021, the total one-year difference in returns between index additions and deletions is

[00:14:14] still a statistically significant 14.8% in favor of deletions. This is likely a combination of the index inclusion effect and a mean reversion related to valuations. The authors show that alternative index fund implementations, including delaying index rebalancing by 12 months after a change in the index, can add up to 0.23% to index fund returns. Both the index inclusion effect and the buy high sell low effect would be less pronounced for a total market fund like VTI than an S&P 500 fund like VO. But the adverse selection cost discussed earlier still applies to VTI from multiple angles. Adverse selection, the index inclusion effect, and buying high and selling low. Index funds are not as efficient as they could be. To bring this back to practical reality, Dimensional Fund Advisors, a fund company that I reviewed in detail in a recent video, is known for funds that tilt towards certain types of stocks like small caps, value stocks, and stocks with robust profitability in an effort to beat the market. They look a lot like index funds, but they have much more flexible

[00:15:14] implementations. While their bread and butter is pursuing small cap and value stocks, they do run a fund that aims to simply capture the US market return. It does not have any tilts towards small cap and value stocks or any tilts at all. But it does follow Dimensional's more flexible implementation. It is, if I may, a non-indexed index fund. If we put it side by side with something like VTI, they almost identical in terms of factor exposures, market cap exposures, sector exposures, and top holdings. But DFUS does not follow an index and does not have rigid rebalancing rules to follow. Dimensional also delays investing in IPOs to avoid the messiness that tends to happen immediately after listing as the market figures out how to value the stock. Full disclosure real quick, my firm uses Dimensional Fund Advisor funds, though we don't use this fund specifically because we actually want the tilts towards small cap and value stocks, but we as a firm are not paid by Dimensional and I am not being paid to say this. I just think it's a really interesting example because it fits the topic so well. This fund is basically the answer to the question, how would you build a fund with all the positive attributes of an index fund and

[00:16:16] none of the downsides? The fact that this non-indexed index fund exists is itself interesting, but its performance is even more interesting because of how well it fits the data. Looking at adverse selection, price impact, and buying high and selling low, it would not be unreasonable to expect a total market fund that operates with more flexibility and delays trading around changes in market composition to outperform an otherwise similar mechanically rebalanced index fund by somewhere between 30 and 80 basis points on average, if not more. Since it listed as an ETF on June 14, 2021 through March 31st, 2025, DFUS, which has an expense ratio of nine basis points, has outperformed VTI, which has an expense ratio of three basis points by 56 basis points annualized net of fees. This fund did exist as a mutual fund with a different strategy prior to becoming an ETF, so using the correct start date is important. Admittedly, over such a short period of time, this could just be noise. And due to tracking error, it

[00:17:16] could reverse in the future, but you can't deny that it's interesting to see the live implementation of these ideas performing within the range of how the research discussed in this video would predict. Index funds are one of the best things to happen to investors in history. They make investing in the stock market and beating the vast majority of active managers easy for anyone to do. Despite them being a huge upgrade from expensive traditional active management, indexes were never designed to be investments. The nature of indexes and of funds that track them results in hidden costs related to adverse selection, price impact, and mean reversion. Together, these inefficiencies could be costing index investors an order of magnitude more than index fund fees. With some small adjustments mostly related to flexibility around trading, investors can recapture those lost returns and through a live products doing so successfully. I do want to reiterate that I am not saying index funds are bad investments. I'll quote the author of sharpening the arithmetic of active management. I think that lowcost index funds are one of the most investor-friendly inventions in finance

[00:18:16] and this paper should not be used as an excuse by active managers who charge high fees while adding little or no value. I feel the same way. But indexes were never designed to be investments. Designing an investment that takes all the good aspects of index funds, low cost, broad diversification, tax efficiency, but implements them intentionally to maximize investment returns rather than mechanically following an index is an idea that has merit both in theory and as we just saw in practice. Thanks for watching. I'm Ben Felix, chief investment officer at PWL Capital. Tell me what you think about non-indexed index investing in the comments.
