[00:00:00] Hi. Welcome back. For much of 2026, I've spent my time talking about my data updates. But I think it's time for me to move on and in particular, go back to the AI story. You saying another session of the AI story? I hope this one's different. For much of the last two or three years, the AI story has been told by the sales people and advocates. Smart people, but they have a story to sell. They've emphasized the upside, the good stuff that comes out of AI. But in the last few months, we've seen some pushback. We've seen cracks emerge in that story, both in markets and in terms of businesses. It showed up last week and the week before when the big tech companies had their earnings reports and announced tens of billions of dollars invested in AI. A year ago, a year and a half ago, that'd have been viewed as a positive, but markets went down. And in particular, at the start of last week, a report came out on AI from Citron Research. It's the publisher of macro and stock research. And basically,

[00:01:01] it painted essentially a doomsday scenario. Now, as you look at the Citron AI assessment, you have to look at, you know, look at it in the perspective of, "Hey, there are people out there who claim the good stuff." And the Citron AI assessment unfolds, it basically it starts by setting a date, June 30th of 2028. And that's going to become a critical part of the story. That's just over two years from now. And it starts with a macro story that's not a good one. Unemployment has risen above 10% and the market is down 40%. The economy is in shambles. And what's driving it is AI. Now, I've seen AI doomsday scenarios before, but it's usually from people who think AI will not work. And the doomsday scenarios for the people who invest in AI having to write down their investments. What makes the Citron AI assessment different was it starts with the assumption that AI works and it works really well and really quickly and it displaces workers in a whole host of white-collar businesses, lawyers,

[00:02:01] bankers, consultants. And it argues that the jobs that they lose and the income that they lose as a as a result causes the economy to stumble, not surprisingly because there's less money to be spent and that the loss of income plays out as drop in markets, drop in employment. So it's it's basically a story of AI succeeding really quickly and really well and how the rest of the economy responds to that. Now, I have issues with the Citrine scenario that I'll come back and take take and and and talk about. But I think credit should be given where it's due. The Citrine assessment opened the conversation up to this discussion of what will AI do to the rest of the economy. Now, to step back, I've been always concerned about worshipping at the altar of disruption as we have for much of this century. Where where disruptors are put on a pedestal. And while I agree that disruption is part, I mean I buy into the Joseph

[00:03:02] Schumpeter description of capitalism as creative destruction, that you need disruption for an economy to stay vibrant and young and net I think we've benefited from disruption. I think we can't look away from the reality disruption comes with cost, that there are disrupted and people working at those disrupted businesses. Now, I think the reason many AI advocates took issue with the Citrine report was it brought into this their sales pitch of AI replacing all these white-collar workers and then asked the question, what then? What happens after these people lose their jobs? Now, clearly it must have hit a nerve because you saw a bunch of other entities jump in with their counter scenarios, Goldman Sachs, Moody's, JP Morgan. I was a little surprised that Citadel jumped into the group because Citadel is not the kind of entity that usually weighs into these business debates in the open. But they took on a direct rebuttal of Citron AI. And now if you look at the Citron AI Citadel AI

[00:04:02] assessment, it's built on three pillars to contest the Citron AI argument. The first is it looks at current data on layoffs and jobs and notes that there hasn't been a falling off the cliff even in businesses like software which have been targeted directly by AI. There's been a loss of about 6% in software jobs over the last two or three years, but that might be just normal attrition in a business that had hired too much. The second thing they point to is history. They look at past disruptions, PC business, the internet, and note that those disruptions took time, that there were three steps forward, two steps back, and that they never happened in compressed time like the Citron AI AI scenario. And the third is grounded macroeconomics. When you talk about disrupting an existing business, replacing existing workers, there's a productivity benefit you get out of it. And as Citadel points out, you've never had a major disruption which creates a productivity benefit this large and have

[00:05:04] the economy and the market suffer the way Citron AI sees it suffering. Now this might be about short-term versus long-term, but that's a good point. Now as you look at these scenarios, the problem with all of them is they take the weakest response on Citron AI, which is take one scenario and flesh it out fully acting as if that's the base case scenario. Now I've always wondered about the Citron AI assessment at least since I've read it, whether it was a worst-case scenario, a low-likelihood scenario, or a likely scenario. Because the way you respond to the the Citron AI assessment is going to be very different. If it's a likely scenario and you buy into it, we're in big trouble especially if you have a white-collar job because it means your job is at risk and if you lose your job, it's a very likely your portfolio is also going to be down 30%. There aren't going to be many jobs for you to jump into, at least in the short term. If it's a low likelihood scenario, then you can talk about, "Hey, that's not likely that I could lose my job, but there's a chance, and I'm going to put in some risk protection strategies." If

[00:06:06] it's a worst-case scenario, I'm not sure what to do with it, because other than shock value, I've never found worst-case scenarios to be particularly useful in investment action. So, let's take a step back and talk about scenarios in general, and how finance has responded to uncertainty in the past. In much of finance and economics, we've made point estimates. What are point estimates? If you ask me to value a a company, I make my best judgment of revenue growth and margins and reinvestment and risk, and come up with the value for the company. It's a point estimate. But, I'm going to be wrong 100% of the time. And I've always wondered why we've been so slow to adopt probabilistic approaches in finance and economics, and I can think of three reasons. One is, until recently, it was expensive, because we didn't have the data and the and powerful enough tools to incorporate traditional probabilistic techniques like simulations and scenario analysis, so we didn't do that. Now, that excuse is gone. The second excuse is that many

[00:07:09] of the people in finance and economics are still uncomfortable with statistics. You know, they've they've taken a statistic class, but they don't they don't remember their their distributions other than the normal distribution. And the third, and I think this this is almost psychological, there are many people, especially in finance, I won't talk about economists, who feel that if they give their clients a sense of how uncertain they are, even though they are uncertain, they'll be viewed as a sign of weakness or lack of conviction, and therefore, it's you you shouldn't let on. You should make a point estimates act like that is the number that you're going to base your decision on. Now, I'm going to focus in on there there are a variety of probabilistic techniques, you know, you can do Monte Carlo simulation, some particularly fond of, but I want to focus in on scenario analysis because this session is on the Citrini AI doomsday scenario and the counter scenarios. In its most sloppy form, scenario analysis has been practiced a long time. You do a best case, a base case, and a

[00:08:10] worst case. But I've never understood what you do with this. Now, the And here's the reason. There are almost no risky investments, none that I know of, which are so good that they're that they do well even in your worst-case scenarios. In a worst-case scenario, investment is not going to work well. Conversely, there are no investments, no matter how good, that that uh no There are no investments, no matter how bad, that don't look good in a best-case scenario. So, best-case, base-case, worst-case scenarios, to me at least, are not that useful. Done right, in a scenario analysis, you should outline all possible scenarios, at least scenarios that stretch across all possible outcomes. Which already is tricky because the world is a continuous place, right? Your your unemployment rate doesn't go 4 and 1/2 to 6, it goes 4 and 1/2, it could be 4.6, 4.7. So, you got to bunch up these these these continuous outcomes into scenarios, but covering all possible outcomes. You have to attach You have to

[00:09:11] attach probabilities to those scenarios and compute an expected value. Now, that's going to be difficult in AI where you we're so early in the game. So, I'm going to suggest an alternative, which I think can be applied in scenario analysis. It draws on something I do in evaluation called the 3P test. Well, when I tell evaluation story, I ask, is it possible? Is it plausible? Is it probable? This sounds like I'm playing on words, but I'm raising the ante with each one. So, when you do scenario analysis, one of the things I think we we need to push people to do or do ourselves with this is our scenario analysis is make a judgement on is this a possible scenario? Is this a plausible scenario? Is it a probable scenario? What's a possible scenario? It can happen. It's not a fairy tale. A plausible scenario, you need more information, more data to back it up. Somebody's done something like this before. You could look at the AI past disruptions. A probable scenario, you actually look at what AI is already

[00:10:12] doing. You draw on data to make a judgement that is more based in the data. Possible, plausible, probable. I think as we look at more and more AI scenarios being thrown at us, it would make sense for us to step back and put it into that spectrum. So, let's look at a framework we can use if we decide to go down this AI scenario analysis. Any AI scenario is to start by asking and answering two broad questions. The first is will AI displace people in businesses or will it provide them with more powerful tools? I know it's not necessarily an either or because even with more powerful tools, you could argue eventually workers get displaced, but this is a question of displacement now or is it just more powerful tools? If you look at it, some of AI's most most vocal advocates and throw Daryl and Moda for instance argues that AI will have the capacity to replace white collar workers in a bunch of different businesses, you know? So, if you look at

[00:11:14] Citrine versus Citadel, Citrine assumes broad displacement where Citadel sees much narrower displacement, fewer businesses. So, that's the first question. Will it displace workers more powerful tools? Where do you fall in that continuum? And the second is how quickly will AI disruption happen? Some AI optimists believe it's imminent that the tools are there that this is going to be rolled out very quickly. Others argue that it's going to take time. Here again, you look at Citrine versus Citadel. Citrine assumes it'll happen quickly. So, it brought displacement across lots of different white-collar jobs. Citadel sees much slower disruption. In fact, as you look across in among different scenarios, this is going These are the two questions we'll see the biggest differences. So, let's look at this how quickly can it happen, you know, and look at where we stand in the AI disruption. The Federal Reserve in St. Louis maintains a very interesting data set of AI adoption broken down by business, as well as the

[00:12:14] time and the productivity effect it's having. So, take these with a grain of salt because these are surveys and surveys are notoriously noisy. So, first first piece of news is more people are using AI, but the jump is not exponential. So, if you look across time from from August 2024 through November 2025, there's been a climb, but the climb is not, you know, it's not doubling. It's gone up, but not by huge amount. Second interesting finding is more people are using AI tools for personal their personal lives than at work. And if you look across businesses at the percentage time saved that people claim they save because of AI tools. And again, with a grain of salt, the biggest time savings are actually in management of companies. I don't even know what that means, but the next highest is technology. If you look across businesses, they're all pretty modest right now. The amount of time you're saving with AI tools. So,

[00:13:15] AI usage is climbing, but not exponentially. More personal than business, and it's providing only modest savings in time, at least according to the AI surveys. Now, if you look at AI disruption, there's going to be benefits, but there's going to be cost. That's the That's what I think Cetreani faced, you know, faced up to the that other scenarios before didn't do fully. What are the benefits of AI? They come from the fact that there will be higher productivity. That productivity can come because you can replace people with an AI entity or because you give people tools that make them more productive. So, I'm I'm willing to make, you know, jump out there and make a couple of hypotheses about how these benefits will play out based upon the answers to the two questions. Will it displace or will it be a tool? How quickly will it happen? Let's look at the displacement effect. Um, the disruption benefits from AI disruption from will be greater if

[00:14:18] people are displaced as tools. I know that sounds inhumane. But if you are think about the productivity effect, how much output you have for for the labor, the workers you have, if you can replace workers, the productivity effect is going to be far greater. And it's going to be, you know, that then if it is just AI tools. The second is the productivity effect is going to be far greater if the disruption happens quickly rather than sooner. So, if you look at the Cetreani AI story, it is going to have much higher productivity benefits than the Cetreani story. I think, but I thought the Cetreani the the Cetreani story was a doomsday story. Here's the other half of AI disruption, the cost. AI disruption comes from the fact that we need displace people. That's not just, you know, these people lose their jobs, they lose their income, they're unable to spend, consumption goes down, they can't invest money. There is going to be a cost. Here again, that cost is going to be a function of how AI plays out. If

[00:15:19] AI disruption is going to take the form of people displacement in a wider area of businesses, the costs are going to be far greater than if it's just tools. And the costs are going to be far greater if it happens quickly rather than sooner. So, unfortunately, the same forces that create high AI benefits are also going to create high AI costs. So, here's what I decided to do. I decided to look at um this as a matrix. On one end of one side of the matrix, I look at the speed of disruption. Speedy to you know, quick to slow. And the second is the type of disruption. Is it displacing people or is it providing tools? Let's take what let's broadly call it the citrine historic. You know, AI disruption happens quickly, it displaces a lot of people. At least in the short term, you get lots of benefits. It's actually one of the higher benefit effects in the short term, but the costs are even higher. Why? Because if you displace a lot of people quickly, the

[00:16:20] system takes a while to adjust. In the long term, you might benefit, but the not as as Lord Keynes said, in the long term we're all dead. So, that's your disruption nuke scenario. It happens quickly, it's massive. If disruption happens, but it takes time, then I think the benefits in the short term are going to be smaller than if it happens quickly, but the costs are also going to be much smaller. In fact, in the long term, delayed so let's call it the delayed detonation where the benefits show up quickly and they do climb, but the costs are much lower early on. The costs might actually much might get much greater in the long term. So, that's disruption with delayed detonation. The two bottom scenarios are where AI is more tools than displacement. The benefits there are much smaller across the board, but there again, if the disruption is quick with AI tools, the benefits and costs are greater than if you have a disruption fizzle, which is

[00:17:21] not only does it happen slowly, but it's mostly low-impact tools. Need tools, but tools that don't make much of a productivity difference. So, you can basically take almost every AI scenario and put it somewhere in this matrix. So, let's take some of the AI broad AI scenarios and put them to the three P test. So, first one is you have massive, you know, worker displacement in most businesses. The tools are game-changing tools. The disruption happens quickly. So, let's for lack of a better word call it the citrine no AI story. The net benefits are negative in the short-term. I think it's possible. It's definitely on the realm of possibility. But, I don't think it's plausible. Why? Because and and I'll talk about why in a in a few minutes. The second scenario is you get worker displacement in most businesses. The tool powers are game-changing in some businesses, not in others. You know, the

[00:18:21] disruption takes time to happen. The benefits are more likely to be positive and large. And could it happen? Yes, it's plausible. The third scenario is that disruption happens in some businesses. Some of the AI tools are game-changing. It happens slowly. And the benefits are again net benefits are positive. They're They're in the middle. They're not as large as they would have been if the disruption happens right away and it's game-changing. And I that's the scenario that I'm going to call probable and I'll come back and and justify it. The The fourth scenario is that disruption happens in some businesses. The AI tools are incremental. They're not game-changing. It happens quickly. There might be a small net benefit and it's plausible. And finally, there are disruption happens in very few and no businesses that AI tools happen to be incremental and happen slowly. This is the disruption fizzle scenario where not much is going to happen in terms of

[00:19:22] benefits and costs. So, let me give you my backing for why I think disruption is going to happen in some businesses but not across all white-collar businesses. They're going to get some game-changing tools in those in across businesses, but most of them are going to be incremental and it's going to happen slowly. Let's start with the justification for why I think disruption is going to be slower than the two-year assessment in the Citrini scenario. First is I'm impressed with a lot of the AI products that I see. And but they have glitches to work through, things they have to work through, and it's quite it's not quite ready for autonomy. In other words, you can't replace a human being with an AI tool. I think I don't I I think there's a lot of glitches to work on. Second, if you look at the history of disruption, then I've seen four in my lifetime: PCs, the internet, social media, now AI. None of these disruptions happened linear quickly with no no glitches, some

[00:20:23] something to slow them down. I remember the dot-com the dot-com disruption almost broke in 2001 when the market busted. It came back, but it took a while. The third is human nature, which is people take a while to adjust. They say they'll adjust quickly, but the reluctance changes deep, especially if you're older and in more established businesses. My justification for why I think AI is not going to be a fizzle, I think AI is I mean a lot of people who think of AI tools as neat and they'll never catch on. Think of ChatGPT on steroids. And what the heck is ChatGPT going to do that I can't do? AI is far more than that. This isn't Big Blue, it's not mechanical. In fact, um you know, it's a it's kind of scary what AI entities can do that are human-like. And I think in many ways businesses and jobs, it's not that you know, that the people are not bright and have intuition. It's businesses have

[00:21:26] created jobs that don't use people's intuition and intelligence that much. We've created jobs that are rule-driven because we don't like mistakes, we're risk-averse. And as a consequence, I think there are a lot of jobs that will be replaced by AI because of how we've constructed those jobs. So, if you ask me to pick AI employee, you know, where AI is going to have the biggest you know, impact displacing employees, I think it's more likely in young companies with younger employees than older companies, the aging workforce. It's the inertia effect. It's going to be greater in businesses with high gross margins. That's where AI is going to go first because, you know, that's where you can get the biggest profits. It's going to be less likely in businesses with lower gross margins. There's not much room to get. It's going to be greater with mechanical and rule-based products and services. And less likely where there's people involved, you know, where there's networking to be used, you know. And

[00:22:27] it's more likely when you have no weak system protection. From whom? From regulators, legal systems. Great it's less likely when there's strong system protection. Let's take a few examples, software. You can see why software is most exposed. Software is a young business with a lot of young employees. Inertia hasn't set in as deeply. High gross margins. So, basically your eyes light up if you're an AI, you know, entity looking at software. A lot of mechanical and rule-based product. The nature of software is it's got to follow rules. It's got to be, you know. And finally, there's almost no system protection. It's very difficult to patent and protect yourself. If you're not doing this for regulators, you're doing it for, you know, businesses to get things done. Now, if you think about businesses, you know, I know people talk about the legal business, the banking business, the appraisal business. I'll take the appraisal business. By itself, it's mechanical and rule-based, fair value accounting, right? And you know what I think is going to protect it? The fact that it's done for accounting rule

[00:23:29] writers. The system might be rewritten to protect you. In what way? Well, the system might say, "Only fair value accounting numbers from people will count, not from AI saying." That makes no sense. Well, when people's jobs are at risk, they will find a way to lobby to protect themselves. So, I think that businesses like, you know, some white-collar businesses are going to stay on simply because of system protection for them. Banking and M&A, let's face it. I don't hire a banker to do a fairness opinion and evaluation because I pay based on that fairness opinion. I do it because I want protection in a court of law. And those courts of law, they want people in there. Now, one of the things that I think is worth thinking about is is, you know, when you look at all these AI scenarios, they yield net benefits. That's good, right? But I think that as we've discovered, you can have net benefits, but there can be losers and winners. And I think it's worth asking who the winners and losers will be. I

[00:24:31] think the interests of AI companies and the rest of the economy will diverge on AI disruption. In fact, think of the scenarios where the benefits are greatest. Speedy, massive disruption, that's great for AI companies, not that good for the rest of the economy. The last few disruptions have tilted the playing fields towards larger companies, and I'm afraid the AI disruption is going to do it even more. And from a social perspective, I know we talk about wealth and income inequality, and I have a feeling that a strong AI disruption will make those problems worse. Now, one final point on job displacement, a job is not just a source of income, it's a source of self-esteem and worth, and you have to worry about displacing workers, you know, and telling them that what they've spent their lives perfecting, thinking they become experts on, a machine can do easily. Right? I know that there's a, you know, this is exactly what happened to blue-collar workers with the last couple of disruptions, and we didn't pay much attention to their psychic damage. Maybe

[00:25:33] a hint of Schadenfreude here when bankers and appraisers and lawyers get laid off, but that doesn't take away from the fact that there's a psychic cost to be paid. Now, I've talked already about the Demodern Bot, a bot that was been developed by Vasant Dhar, my friend at Stern, and it basically has been given everything I've ever done, which is all online, my writings, my teaching, my YouTube videos, and it's basically trying to replace me. And I've been trying to run ahead of it, and I've written about what I what I have to do to try to stay ahead of it, and I've talked about four things that I can do that my bot can't do, at least yet. One is I'm a generalist, I'm a dabbler, I move across disciplines. That's historically been a weakness in a world that rewards specialization. Here it might give me a benefit. There's the legend of the left brain and the right brain, right? Left brain controls logic, the right brain is storytelling, where either left-brained or right-brained we'll, you know, partly because we've been encouraged to play to

[00:26:34] our strengths. I've always argued for, you know, using both sides of your brain, because it is going to make it more difficult for an AI entity to replace you. Not impossible, difficult. The third is, you know, we all have reasoning muscles. When you have a question, we try to reason our way to an answer. We live in a world where it's so so easy to look up the answer on Google or ask ChatGPT. I think using that reasoning muscle is going to be an essential component to fighting off the bot that's looking over your shoulder. And finally, for me at least, an idle mind, maybe a devil's workshop. It's where I do much of my thinking and my writing. And I'm lucky that I have so little work to do and so much idle time that I can let my brain wander. You see this in my blog posts that are all over the place, but I think you know, as I look at the Demodern Bot and I can see how much it's learned over the last 2 years. I know I'm a work in progress and I have to keep working. One final point, if you know, as you

[00:27:35] look at preparing for a bot, you're saying, "What if we're over preparing? What if AI never arrives?" I'm reminded of Pascal's wager, you know, Pascalism, French mathematician. When he was asked whether he believed in God, he said he did a matrix where he showed why it's better to believe in God than not on an expected value basis. He said, "If I believe God exists and he actually does exist, I go to heaven. If I believe God exists and there's no God, well, there's some pain for me, but it's small. If I believe God doesn't exist and he exists, then I go to hell. I mean, that pretty much settles it, right? The expected value is positive. It's better to believe in God even if you don't think there's a heavenly entity." I would say the same thing about AI. Whether AI works or not, acting like it's going to work is going to make you better at whatever you do as teacher, a lawyer, a banker, you know. So, if it does work, you're prepared, at least partially. If it doesn't work, you're a better banker, better lawyer. I would argue that it it act like there's

[00:28:36] a bot looking over your shoulder. Do what you need to do to keep that bot at bay because it'll make you better at whatever you do. I hope you found this session useful and I thank you very much for listening.
