[00:00:00] Hi, welcome to this the first session of this investment philosophies class. Now, you're already probably asking what the heck is an investment philosophy and why should I have one? So, let me get down to brass tax right away. An investment philosophy is a coherent way of thinking about markets and investors and how you think you should invest. So to work you need to understand how markets make mistakes if they do and how if at all you can take advantage of those mistakes. Now your first reaction when I say investment philosophy is hey what about buying low PE stocks. Buying low PE stocks is not a philosophy it's a strategy. And I want to draw a contrast between an investment philosophy and an investment strategy. An investment strategy is a way in which you think you can make money. buying low PE stocks you think can make you money whether it's true or not. An investment philosophy is far bigger. It composes multiple strategies and you can argue that a

[00:01:02] philosophy is essentially what allows you to come up with new strategies when old ones stop working. So let's start this discussion of investment philosophy. At the heart of every investment philosophy is a view about human behavior. The last 40 years in finance, we've developed this area of behavioral finance. Behavioral finance, we contest the rationality assumption that's at the core of much of economics and finance. And we bring into play psychological insights. Connefy who are at the birth of behavioral finance were psychologists. They argue that human beings don't stop being human beings when they come into markets. And the quirks in human behavior that are well observed will show up in markets and investing in prices. And the heart of a philosophy is a belief that those human behaviors cause markets to make mistakes and per perhaps allow other people to take advantage of those mistakes.

[00:02:03] Now of course along the way we will have to talk about market efficiency. A loaded word because the minute you say it you get push back. I think there are lots of different ways in which people think about market efficiency. We'll come back in a later session and talk about them. But to me, the essence of a market efficiency or inefficiency is that you know you you you think there's a market mistake you can exploit to make money. So we can differ in what aspect or where markets are efficient or inefficient and that can lead us to very different ways of thinking about how to make money on markets. Now once you have a philosophy in place you can come up with the investment strategies that flow out of that philosophy. We will talk more again about those strategies but the same philosophy can give rise to multiple investment strategies. You might wonder I've lived all my life as an investor. I don't think I have an investment philosophy. Why do I need one? If you don't have an investment philosophy I will predict that one of

[00:03:03] three things or perhaps all three will happen to you. First, you will become a magnet for scams. Investing is full of people offering you Ponzi schemes, get rich quickly, ways of getting rich quickly. And if you don't have a core philosophy, you're going to be drawn to these scams because even though they look too good to be true, you your greed overrides that that caution you you should bring in. Second, if you don't have an investment philosophy, all you have is a strategy and you pick that strategy because it worked for somebody else. Even somebody as renowned as Warren Buffett or Peter Lynch, when that strategy stops working, you will switch to a different one. Why? Because somebody else made money with the other strategy. That's going to create switching costs. What are switching costs? When you shift from strategy to strategy, you got to sell what's in your portfolio often and buy new things, taxes, transactions, cost, both of which we'll come back and talk about. And if

[00:04:03] you pick a philosophy, even unwittingly, unknowingly, that is not right for you, that doesn't fit you, it's going to keep you awake at night. It's going to stress you out and you are not going to be able to carry through on that philosophy. So I'm going to argue that every investor needs an investment philosophy. To understand the different kinds of investment philosophies, I'm going to go back to the basic investment process. Every investment process starts with the person whose money is being invested. So let's make this simple. Let's suppose you think about investing your own money. You are your own client. Here are the things you got to assess. One is your willingness to take risk. and we'll come back and talk about how you can come up with a more tangible way of measuring that. Are you risk averse or risk tolerant? Your time horizon. A first reaction might be, "Oh, I have a long time horizon." That's what everybody says. We look at how real world concerns can put a crimp on your time horizon and your tax status. If

[00:05:06] you're an individual, you're saying, "I pay taxes. What's my tax status got to do with it?" Remember, you pay taxes differently on different parts of your portfolio. What am I talking about? If you have a 401k or a pension fund, it might be tax exempt. Your regular savings might be taxable. The money you invest for your kids tuition might have a very different tax status. Risk tolerance, time horizon, and tax status. Now, once you've assessed the client and that's you, then you look at the actual job of creating a portfolio. And there are three three parts to it, though they're not necessarily sequential. First is the asset allocation part of the process where you decide how much of your money to put into stocks, into bonds, into real assets, into collectibles, into gold, even crypto, whatever you think fits in there. And your views on markets, whether they're overpriced or underpriced, will come into play. Market timing, we'll talk about, as well as

[00:06:08] your views on macro variables, inflation, rates, and growth. Now once you've made your asset allocation decision, 40% to stocks, 20% of bonds, 40% into real estate, you get to the asset selection phase. What does that mean? You decide to invest 40% of your money in stocks. Which stocks are you going to invest in? Which bonds, which real assets? There you might use a combination of public information and you might value companies and price them. and we'll talk about the distinction or sometimes private information things you know that the rest of the world doesn't and then what you got to execute once you've decided the 25 stocks you need in your portfolio you got to go out and buy them you're saying what's the big deal of an online account I'll just get online and buy them well execution will become more and more significant depending on whether your philosophy/st strategy requires you to trade all the time how often do to trade, how large those trades are. Are you planning to

[00:07:08] use derivatives markets? If there's a trade-off between trading speed, and trading costs, that's got to be factored in. Asset allocation, security selection, execution. When you're done, you have your portfolio. Now, remember, investing is a pragmatic exercise. You invest to make money, to earn returns. You're putting in time and effort. And if you're honest with yourself, you got to assess whether it's worth it. What does that mean? In performance evaluation, you look at how your portfolio did given the risk you took on, whether it earned enough return to cover the risk. And there you're looking at both your skills as a market timer showing up in your asset allocation and as a stock picker. Along the way, there are variables outside of you that come into play. the trade-off between risk and return. Whether markets are efficient, if they make mistakes, where they make mistakes, the systems you trade in, and models for risk and return, that's investment process. If it's your own money, you're

[00:08:10] saying, "What if I'm investing other people's money?" The only part of the process that's going to be different then is since it's not your money, it's somebody else's money. The questions about risk tolerance and time horizon and tax status has to be about that person. It's always the person whose money that's being invested that should drive your choices rather than your own. That investment process is going to allow us to think about different kinds of investment philosophies. In particular, there are four categorizations I'm going to make on investment philosophies. The first is do you want to be an investor or do you want to be a trader? You're saying what's the big deal? What's the difference? When you invest, you estimate the value of something, and you buy if the price is less, and you pray and hope that they converge. In trading, you buy at a low price, you sell at a higher price. You really don't care. It's not deep. You're not wondering why it happened. You just want to make that difference. Investing versus trading.

[00:09:10] We'll come back and talk about the contrast. At this stage, you're saying, "I'm an investor. I don't want to be a trader." Don't be so quick to judge. Your investment philosophy can be about market timing. You think your skills are in looking at overall markets, stock markets, bond markets or within stock markets, different geographies and calling direction and betting on the direction through your asset allocation decision. Or you might believe you're better at stock picking. You're not good at market timing. Or you might be one of those people who thinks you're good at both. Activist versus passive investing. Not active versus passive. That's a different contrast. Activist versus passive investing. In passive investing, you buy something and then you go back to do living the rest of your life hoping that whatever your investment went goes up. That's what we often do when we buy shares in publicly traded companies. In passive investing, your act is just investing and then letting karma play out. In activist investing, you invest in something and then you

[00:10:11] take a role in how what you've invested in is run. Activist investing obviously requires far more in resources than passive investing. We'll talk about that contrast. And finally, as a subtext here to all these choices, some investment philosophies can be short-term, others can be long-term. There's nothing inherently good or bad about either. They're just different. Now, with that categorization, let's talk about contradictory versus complimentary philosophies. Now sometimes you'll have investors who are both as I said market time is and stock pickers. That's perfectly okay. They can coexist. You can have different investment philosophies coexisting with the same investor. You might believe that markets are slow to learn from it information. Therefore, you might be a market timer who trades on price momentum. But at the same time, you can have market times or contrarians. In other words, in the same market, you can have people with very different and contradictive views. In stock selection, you get people who

[00:11:12] use fundamentals, people who use charts, people who look at pricing momentum, again coexisting in the same market. These contradictory philosophies can sometimes come from different views of the market, but they can also come from different time horizon, views on risk, tax statuses. Put simply, nobody here has a monopoly on the right philosophy. You can have different philosophies and they can all strangely make money at different points in time. Ultimately, this is an exercise in being pragmatic. There are no pure investment philosophies, good versus bad. This is about making money. So, let me go back and put investment philosophies in context using those three steps in the portfolio building process. Your investment philosophy, it's a market timing philosophy will show up primarily in the asset allocation part. How much money you allocate to stocks, to bonds, to real estate. If you're a stock picker, it's

[00:12:12] going to show up primarily in the stock selection part. Whether you're a chartist, a value investor, a growth investor. If on the other hand, you're neither an asset allocation or a stock picker, your investment philosophy might be finding small market mistakes and locking in your profits. You might just be a trader. You might be an information trader or an arbitrage-based trader. We'll talk about all of these different philosophies and they will play out in different parts of the portfolio process. So, as we embark on this journey, there are the three steps I would like to take you through. I'm going to spend the first few sessions acquiring what I call the tools of the trade. Being able to understand risk and incorporating that risk into your decision- making. Understanding the difference between value and price and how to value companies. Understanding the language of business which is accounting and understanding the frictions and the costs of trading. What is the true cost of trading? What are the reasons you

[00:13:12] might trade quickly and what are the costs you might bear? So, we'll spend the first few sessions because without those tools for the trade, we can fall into traps. Second step and this is part of a process that starts now and will you can continue for the rest of your investing life is to develop a point of view about how markets work and where they might break down. We'll start on that discussion but the but the point I would like to make is the discussion will not be over when this class is over. You would your views on markets will continue to evolve as you observe what happens in markets and as they evolve your philosophy might change and then find the philosophy that provides the best fit for you. Let me emphasize again the philosophy that's right for you is the one that best fits you. The reason I emphasize that walk into any bookstore and you walk to the investing section you're going to see books on great investors. Warren Buffett alone probably has a a thousand books written about him. And you pick up the

[00:14:13] book and you read that book and you say, "I want to be like Warren Buffett. I want to be like Peter Lynch. I want to be like George Soros. I want to be like Jim Simon." That's nice. They had philosophies. They were successful investors but none of their philosophies might work for you because your the philosophy that's right for you fits you in terms of your risk aversion in terms of how much you have to invest in terms of your time arise and your tax status and you got to find that philosophy. So let's talk a little bit about those factors and how they will play out. Let's start with the assertion and I think this is an assertion that at least in the investing space investors are for the most part risk averse. What does that mean? They don't like to take risk. And to induce them to take risk, you got to offer them a higher return. And if you want a higher expected return, you got to be willing to live with risk. Now, of course, that opens the door to what is risk? How do we measure it? How do we come up with a quantitative

[00:15:14] measure? And do those risk and return models work in terms of delivering results in terms of portfolio size? How much money you have to invest will clearly play an impact will have an impact and what investment philosophy you adopt. You know now you might say well if I have a lot of money do I start with an advantage? Not necessarily because for some strategies you might need less funds to succeed. It's true. If you want to be an activist value investor, we try to change the way companies run. You you can't do that with a $100,000 or $10,000 in your portfolio. But there might be niche strategies. We're trying to take advantage of a small mistake in the market that's a small one where you're better off having less to invest than more because a hundred billion dollars directed at that mistake can very quickly wipe out your returns. So your portfolio size can affect your philosophy choice and time arise. As I said, most people when

[00:16:15] they're asked what their time horizon is will almost automatically say, "I have a long time horizon." Because they've been taught that that's the right thing to say. But do you really control your time horizon? Some of your time horizon comes from who you are as a person. Some of us are naturally more patient than others. And if you're more patient than others, you have a longer time horizon. You're born with that. You can't change that. The other is the world imposes constraints on you. You're 74 years old. Your time horizon is getting shorter than when you were 24 years old. Age matters. Your health matters. Whether your kids have to go to college matters because you need the cash. So your need for cash can make your long time horizon to much shorter one. So rather than just say long time horizon, look inward. at what kind of time horizon you can afford to have. Generally, the longer the time horizon you have, the greater the amount of your portfolio you can put

[00:17:15] into risky investments. Why? Because risky investments get upside, they also get downside. Downside can be pretty substantial. And if you have downside, you need time to recover. So think about your risk aversion, how much money you have to invest in your time horizon, but also think about your tax status. It's going to state the obvious. You get to spend only the returns you're left over after paying taxes. So, a portfolio that's right for somebody who's tax exempt might not be right for you. And even within your portfolio, some of your money might be tax exempt. As I said in a pension fund, others might not. And along the way, you got to work in the differential treatment of income, capital gains versus dividends, different portions of your savings, and changing tax rates across time. You can see choice of an investment philosophy requires being inward looking and making that judgment. So what what is the the bottom line I hope you get out of this session? Every

[00:18:17] investor needs an investment philosophy and you have to have beliefs about markets and how they work. Which means that this is not something that you can just read up. You got to get you you got to observe what happens in markets. Think about it and incorporate that into your thinking. As you invest, you will learn what makes you comfortable and what makes you uncomfortable. And rather than pushing the uncomfortable things away, look deeper at them because they might help you fine-tune the right philosophy. So at the risk of restating what I've said before, there is no one best in investment philosophy for all investors, but there's one that's best for you given who you are as a person. In this class, my objective is to give you a menu of investment philosophies without putting in my biases too much into the process and let you pick what's right for you. And I hope you succeed. Thank you very much for listening.
